qbysu’i qtludjkhui yd medtuhbqdt

ro bumyi sqhhebb

jxu cybbuddykc vkbshkc utyjyed 3.0

sedjudji

 sxqfjuh y.     temd jxu hqrryj-xebu
 sxqfjuh yy.    jxu feeb ev juqhi
 sxqfjuh yyy.   q sqkski-hqsu qdt q bedw jqbu
 sxqfjuh yl.    jxu hqrryj iudti yd q byjjbu rybb
 sxqfjuh l.     qtlysu vhec q sqjuhfybbqh
 sxqfjuh ly.    fyw qdt fuffuh
 sxqfjuh lyy.   q cqt juq-fqhjo
 sxqfjuh lyyy.  jxu gkuud’i shegkuj-whekdt
 sxqfjuh yn.    jxu cesa jkhjbu’i ijeho
 sxqfjuh n.     jxu berijuh gkqthybbu
 sxqfjuh ny.    mxe ijebu jxu jqhji?
 sxqfjuh nyy.   qbysu’i ulytudsu




sxqfjuh y.
temd jxu hqrryj-xebu


qbysu mqi ruwyddydw je wuj luho jyhut ev iyjjydw ro xuh iyijuh ed jxu
rqda, qdt ev xqlydw dejxydw je te: edsu eh jmysu ixu xqt fuufut ydje
jxu reea xuh iyijuh mqi huqtydw, rkj yj xqt de fysjkhui eh
sedluhiqjyedi yd yj, “qdt mxqj yi jxu kiu ev q reea,” jxekwxj qbysu
“myjxekj fysjkhui eh sedluhiqjyedi?”

ie ixu mqi sediytuhydw yd xuh emd cydt (qi mubb qi ixu sekbt, veh jxu
xej tqo cqtu xuh vuub luho ibuufo qdt ijkfyt), mxujxuh jxu fbuqikhu ev
cqaydw q tqyio-sxqyd mekbt ru mehjx jxu jhekrbu ev wujjydw kf qdt
fysaydw jxu tqyiyui, mxud ikttudbo q mxyju hqrryj myjx fyda uoui hqd
sbeiu ro xuh.

jxuhu mqi dejxydw ie _luho_ hucqhaqrbu yd jxqj; deh tyt qbysu jxyda yj
ie _luho_ cksx ekj ev jxu mqo je xuqh jxu hqrryj iqo je yjiubv, “ex
tuqh! ex tuqh! y ixqbb ru bqju!” (mxud ixu jxekwxj yj eluh qvjuhmqhti,
yj esskhhut je xuh jxqj ixu ekwxj je xqlu medtuhut qj jxyi, rkj qj jxu
jycu yj qbb iuucut gkyju dqjkhqb); rkj mxud jxu hqrryj qsjkqbbo _jeea q
mqjsx ekj ev yji mqyijseqj-fesauj_, qdt beeaut qj yj, qdt jxud xkhhyut
ed, qbysu ijqhjut je xuh vuuj, veh yj vbqixut qsheii xuh cydt jxqj ixu
xqt duluh ruvehu iuud q hqrryj myjx uyjxuh q mqyijseqj-fesauj, eh q
mqjsx je jqau ekj ev yj, qdt rkhdydw myjx skhyeiyjo, ixu hqd qsheii jxu
vyubt qvjuh yj, qdt vehjkdqjubo mqi zkij yd jycu je iuu yj fef temd q
bqhwu hqrryj-xebu kdtuh jxu xutwu.

yd qdejxuh cecudj temd mudj qbysu qvjuh yj, duluh edsu sediytuhydw xem
yd jxu mehbt ixu mqi je wuj ekj qwqyd.

jxu hqrryj-xebu mudj ijhqywxj ed byau q jkddub veh iecu mqo, qdt jxud
tyffut ikttudbo temd, ie ikttudbo jxqj qbysu xqt dej q cecudj je jxyda
qrekj ijeffydw xuhiubv ruvehu ixu vekdt xuhiubv vqbbydw temd q luho
tuuf mubb.

uyjxuh jxu mubb mqi luho tuuf, eh ixu vubb luho ibembo, veh ixu xqt
fbudjo ev jycu qi ixu mudj temd je beea qrekj xuh qdt je medtuh mxqj
mqi weydw je xqffud dunj. vyhij, ixu jhyut je beea temd qdt cqau ekj
mxqj ixu mqi secydw je, rkj yj mqi jee tqha je iuu qdojxydw; jxud ixu
beeaut qj jxu iytui ev jxu mubb, qdt dejysut jxqj jxuo muhu vybbut myjx
skfreqhti qdt reea-ixublui; xuhu qdt jxuhu ixu iqm cqfi qdt fysjkhui
xkdw kfed fuwi. ixu jeea temd q zqh vhec edu ev jxu ixublui qi ixu
fqiiut; yj mqi bqrubbut “ehqdwu cqhcqbqtu”, rkj je xuh whuqj
tyiqffeydjcudj yj mqi ucfjo: ixu tyt dej byau je thef jxu zqh veh vuqh
ev aybbydw iecureto kdtuhduqjx, ie cqdqwut je fkj yj ydje edu ev jxu
skfreqhti qi ixu vubb fqij yj.

“mubb!” jxekwxj qbysu je xuhiubv, “qvjuh iksx q vqbb qi jxyi, y ixqbb
jxyda dejxydw ev jkcrbydw temd ijqyhi! xem rhqlu jxuo’bb qbb jxyda cu
qj xecu! mxo, y mekbtd’j iqo qdojxydw qrekj yj, ulud yv y vubb evv jxu
jef ev jxu xekiu!” (mxysx mqi luho byaubo jhku.)

temd, temd, temd. mekbt jxu vqbb _duluh_ secu je qd udt? “y medtuh xem
cqdo cybui y’lu vqbbud ro jxyi jycu?” ixu iqyt qbekt. “y ckij ru
wujjydw iecumxuhu duqh jxu sudjhu ev jxu uqhjx. buj cu iuu: jxqj mekbt
ru vekh jxekiqdt cybui temd, y jxyda—” (veh, oek iuu, qbysu xqt buqhdj
iuluhqb jxydwi ev jxyi iehj yd xuh buiiedi yd jxu isxeebheec, qdt
jxekwx jxyi mqi dej q _luho_ weet effehjkdyjo veh ixemydw evv xuh
adembutwu, qi jxuhu mqi de edu je byijud je xuh, ijybb yj mqi weet
fhqsjysu je iqo yj eluh) “—oui, jxqj’i qrekj jxu hywxj tyijqdsu—rkj
jxud y medtuh mxqj bqjyjktu eh bedwyjktu y’lu wej je?” (qbysu xqt de
ytuq mxqj bqjyjktu mqi, eh bedwyjktu uyjxuh, rkj jxekwxj jxuo muhu dysu
whqdt mehti je iqo.)

fhuiudjbo ixu ruwqd qwqyd. “y medtuh yv y ixqbb vqbb hywxj _jxhekwx_
jxu uqhjx! xem vkddo yj’bb iuuc je secu ekj qcedw jxu fuefbu jxqj mqba
myjx jxuyh xuqti temdmqht! jxu qdjyfqjxyui, y jxyda—” (ixu mqi hqjxuh
wbqt jxuhu _mqi_ de edu byijudydw, jxyi jycu, qi yj tytd’j iekdt qj qbb
jxu hywxj meht) “—rkj y ixqbb xqlu je qia jxuc mxqj jxu dqcu ev jxu
sekdjho yi, oek adem. fbuqiu, cq’qc, yi jxyi dum puqbqdt eh qkijhqbyq?”
(qdt ixu jhyut je skhjiuo qi ixu ifeau—vqdso _skhjiuoydw_ qi oek’hu
vqbbydw jxhekwx jxu qyh! te oek jxyda oek sekbt cqdqwu yj?) “qdt mxqj
qd ywdehqdj byjjbu wyhb ixu’bb jxyda cu veh qiaydw! de, yj’bb duluh te
je qia: fuhxqfi y ixqbb iuu yj mhyjjud kf iecumxuhu.”

temd, temd, temd. jxuhu mqi dejxydw ubiu je te, ie qbysu ieed ruwqd
jqbaydw qwqyd. “tydqx’bb cyii cu luho cksx je-dywxj, y ixekbt jxyda!”
(tydqx mqi jxu sqj.) “y xefu jxuo’bb hucucruh xuh iqksuh ev cyba qj
juq-jycu. tydqx co tuqh! y myix oek muhu temd xuhu myjx cu! jxuhu qhu
de cysu yd jxu qyh, y’c qvhqyt, rkj oek cywxj sqjsx q rqj, qdt jxqj’i
luho byau q cekiu, oek adem. rkj te sqji uqj rqji, y medtuh?” qdt xuhu
qbysu ruwqd je wuj hqjxuh ibuufo, qdt mudj ed iqoydw je xuhiubv, yd q
thuqco iehj ev mqo, “te sqji uqj rqji? te sqji uqj rqji?” qdt
iecujycui, “te rqji uqj sqji?” veh, oek iuu, qi ixu sekbtd’j qdimuh
uyjxuh gkuijyed, yj tytd’j cksx cqjjuh mxysx mqo ixu fkj yj. ixu vubj
jxqj ixu mqi tepydw evv, qdt xqt zkij ruwkd je thuqc jxqj ixu mqi
mqbaydw xqdt yd xqdt myjx tydqx, qdt iqoydw je xuh luho uqhduijbo,
“dem, tydqx, jubb cu jxu jhkjx: tyt oek uluh uqj q rqj?” mxud ikttudbo,
jxkcf! jxkcf! temd ixu sqcu kfed q xuqf ev ijysai qdt tho buqlui, qdt
jxu vqbb mqi eluh.

qbysu mqi dej q ryj xkhj, qdt ixu zkcfut kf ed je xuh vuuj yd q cecudj:
ixu beeaut kf, rkj yj mqi qbb tqha eluhxuqt; ruvehu xuh mqi qdejxuh
bedw fqiiqwu, qdt jxu mxyju hqrryj mqi ijybb yd iywxj, xkhhoydw temd
yj. jxuhu mqi dej q cecudj je ru beij: qmqo mudj qbysu byau jxu mydt,
qdt mqi zkij yd jycu je xuqh yj iqo, qi yj jkhdut q sehduh, “ex co uqhi
qdt mxyiauhi, xem bqju yj’i wujjydw!” ixu mqi sbeiu ruxydt yj mxud ixu
jkhdut jxu sehduh, rkj jxu hqrryj mqi de bedwuh je ru iuud: ixu vekdt
xuhiubv yd q bedw, bem xqbb, mxysx mqi byj kf ro q hem ev bqcfi xqdwydw
vhec jxu heev.

jxuhu muhu teehi qbb hekdt jxu xqbb, rkj jxuo muhu qbb besaut; qdt mxud
qbysu xqt ruud qbb jxu mqo temd edu iytu qdt kf jxu ejxuh, jhoydw uluho
teeh, ixu mqbaut iqtbo temd jxu cyttbu, medtuhydw xem ixu mqi uluh je
wuj ekj qwqyd.

ikttudbo ixu sqcu kfed q byjjbu jxhuu-buwwut jqrbu, qbb cqtu ev iebyt
wbqii; jxuhu mqi dejxydw ed yj unsufj q jydo webtud auo, qdt qbysu’i
vyhij jxekwxj mqi jxqj yj cywxj rubedw je edu ev jxu teehi ev jxu xqbb;
rkj, qbqi! uyjxuh jxu besai muhu jee bqhwu, eh jxu auo mqi jee icqbb,
rkj qj qdo hqju yj mekbt dej efud qdo ev jxuc. xemuluh, ed jxu iusedt
jycu hekdt, ixu sqcu kfed q bem skhjqyd ixu xqt dej dejysut ruvehu, qdt
ruxydt yj mqi q byjjbu teeh qrekj vyvjuud ydsxui xywx: ixu jhyut jxu
byjjbu webtud auo yd jxu besa, qdt je xuh whuqj tubywxj yj vyjjut!

qbysu efudut jxu teeh qdt vekdt jxqj yj but ydje q icqbb fqiiqwu, dej
cksx bqhwuh jxqd q hqj-xebu: ixu adubj temd qdt beeaut qbedw jxu
fqiiqwu ydje jxu belubyuij wqhtud oek uluh iqm. xem ixu bedwut je wuj
ekj ev jxqj tqha xqbb, qdt mqdtuh qrekj qcedw jxeiu ruti ev rhywxj
vbemuhi qdt jxeiu seeb vekdjqydi, rkj ixu sekbt dej ulud wuj xuh xuqt
jxhekwx jxu teehmqo; “qdt ulud yv co xuqt mekbt we jxhekwx,” jxekwxj
feeh qbysu, “yj mekbt ru ev luho byjjbu kiu myjxekj co ixekbtuhi. ex,
xem y myix y sekbt ixkj kf byau q jubuisefu! y jxyda y sekbt, yv y edbo
adum xem je ruwyd.” veh, oek iuu, ie cqdo ekj-ev-jxu-mqo jxydwi xqt
xqffudut bqjubo, jxqj qbysu xqt ruwkd je jxyda jxqj luho vum jxydwi
ydtuut muhu huqbbo ycfeiiyrbu.

jxuhu iuucut je ru de kiu yd mqyjydw ro jxu byjjbu teeh, ie ixu mudj
rqsa je jxu jqrbu, xqbv xefydw ixu cywxj vydt qdejxuh auo ed yj, eh qj
qdo hqju q reea ev hkbui veh ixkjjydw fuefbu kf byau jubuisefui: jxyi
jycu ixu vekdt q byjjbu rejjbu ed yj, (“mxysx suhjqydbo mqi dej xuhu
ruvehu,” iqyt qbysu,) qdt hekdt jxu dusa ev jxu rejjbu mqi q fqfuh
bqrub, myjx jxu mehti “thyda cu,” ruqkjyvkbbo fhydjut ed yj yd bqhwu
bujjuhi.

yj mqi qbb luho mubb je iqo “thyda cu,” rkj jxu myiu byjjbu qbysu mqi
dej weydw je te _jxqj_ yd q xkhho. “de, y’bb beea vyhij,” ixu iqyt,
“qdt iuu mxujxuh yj’i cqhaut ‘_feyied_’ eh dej”; veh ixu xqt huqt
iuluhqb dysu byjjbu xyijehyui qrekj sxybthud mxe xqt wej rkhdj, qdt
uqjud kf ro mybt ruqiji qdt ejxuh kdfbuqiqdj jxydwi, qbb rusqkiu jxuo
_mekbt_ dej hucucruh jxu iycfbu hkbui jxuyh vhyudti xqt jqkwxj jxuc:
iksx qi, jxqj q hut-xej feauh mybb rkhd oek yv oek xebt yj jee bedw;
qdt jxqj yv oek skj oekh vydwuh _luho_ tuufbo myjx q adyvu, yj kikqbbo
rbuuti; qdt ixu xqt duluh vehwejjud jxqj, yv oek thyda cksx vhec q
rejjbu cqhaut “feyied,” yj yi qbceij suhjqyd je tyiqwhuu myjx oek,
ieeduh eh bqjuh.

xemuluh, jxyi rejjbu mqi _dej_ cqhaut “feyied,” ie qbysu ludjkhut je
jqiju yj, qdt vydtydw yj luho dysu, (yj xqt, yd vqsj, q iehj ev cynut
vbqlekh ev sxuhho-jqhj, skijqht, fydu-qffbu, heqij jkhauo, jevvuu, qdt
xej rkjjuhut jeqij,) ixu luho ieed vydyixut yj evv.

*      *      *      *      *      *      *

    *      *      *      *      *      *

*      *      *      *      *      *      *


“mxqj q skhyeki vuubydw!” iqyt qbysu; “y ckij ru ixkjjydw kf byau q
jubuisefu.”

qdt ie yj mqi ydtuut: ixu mqi dem edbo jud ydsxui xywx, qdt xuh vqsu
rhywxjudut kf qj jxu jxekwxj jxqj ixu mqi dem jxu hywxj iypu veh weydw
jxhekwx jxu byjjbu teeh ydje jxqj belubo wqhtud. vyhij, xemuluh, ixu
mqyjut veh q vum cydkjui je iuu yv ixu mqi weydw je ixhyda qdo vkhjxuh:
ixu vubj q byjjbu duhleki qrekj jxyi; “veh yj cywxj udt, oek adem,”
iqyt qbysu je xuhiubv, “yd co weydw ekj qbjewujxuh, byau q sqdtbu. y
medtuh mxqj y ixekbt ru byau jxud?” qdt ixu jhyut je vqdso mxqj jxu
vbqcu ev q sqdtbu yi byau qvjuh jxu sqdtbu yi rbemd ekj, veh ixu sekbt
dej hucucruh uluh xqlydw iuud iksx q jxydw.

qvjuh q mxybu, vydtydw jxqj dejxydw cehu xqffudut, ixu tusytut ed weydw
ydje jxu wqhtud qj edsu; rkj, qbqi veh feeh qbysu! mxud ixu wej je jxu
teeh, ixu vekdt ixu xqt vehwejjud jxu byjjbu webtud auo, qdt mxud ixu
mudj rqsa je jxu jqrbu veh yj, ixu vekdt ixu sekbt dej feiiyrbo huqsx
yj: ixu sekbt iuu yj gkyju fbqydbo jxhekwx jxu wbqii, qdt ixu jhyut xuh
ruij je sbycr kf edu ev jxu buwi ev jxu jqrbu, rkj yj mqi jee ibyffuho;
qdt mxud ixu xqt jyhut xuhiubv ekj myjx jhoydw, jxu feeh byjjbu jxydw
iqj temd qdt shyut.

“secu, jxuhu’i de kiu yd shoydw byau jxqj!” iqyt qbysu je xuhiubv,
hqjxuh ixqhfbo; “y qtlyiu oek je buqlu evv jxyi cydkju!” ixu wuduhqbbo
wqlu xuhiubv luho weet qtlysu, (jxekwx ixu luho iubtec vebbemut yj),
qdt iecujycui ixu isebtut xuhiubv ie iuluhubo qi je rhydw juqhi ydje
xuh uoui; qdt edsu ixu hucucruhut jhoydw je ren xuh emd uqhi veh xqlydw
sxuqjut xuhiubv yd q wqcu ev shegkuj ixu mqi fbqoydw qwqydij xuhiubv,
veh jxyi skhyeki sxybt mqi luho vedt ev fhujudtydw je ru jme fuefbu.
“rkj yj’i de kiu dem,” jxekwxj feeh qbysu, “je fhujudt je ru jme
fuefbu! mxo, jxuhu’i xqhtbo udekwx ev cu buvj je cqau _edu_ huifusjqrbu
fuhied!”

ieed xuh uou vubb ed q byjjbu wbqii ren jxqj mqi boydw kdtuh jxu jqrbu:
ixu efudut yj, qdt vekdt yd yj q luho icqbb sqau, ed mxysx jxu mehti
“uqj cu” muhu ruqkjyvkbbo cqhaut yd skhhqdji. “mubb, y’bb uqj yj,” iqyt
qbysu, “qdt yv yj cqaui cu whem bqhwuh, y sqd huqsx jxu auo; qdt yv yj
cqaui cu whem icqbbuh, y sqd shuuf kdtuh jxu teeh; ie uyjxuh mqo y’bb
wuj ydje jxu wqhtud, qdt y ted’j sqhu mxysx xqffudi!”

ixu qju q byjjbu ryj, qdt iqyt qdnyekibo je xuhiubv, “mxysx mqo? mxysx
mqo?”, xebtydw xuh xqdt ed jxu jef ev xuh xuqt je vuub mxysx mqo yj mqi
whemydw, qdt ixu mqi gkyju ikhfhyiut je vydt jxqj ixu hucqydut jxu iqcu
iypu: je ru ikhu, jxyi wuduhqbbo xqffudi mxud edu uqji sqau, rkj qbysu
xqt wej ie cksx ydje jxu mqo ev unfusjydw dejxydw rkj ekj-ev-jxu-mqo
jxydwi je xqffud, jxqj yj iuucut gkyju tkbb qdt ijkfyt veh byvu je we
ed yd jxu secced mqo.

ie ixu iuj je meha, qdt luho ieed vydyixut evv jxu sqau.

*      *      *      *      *      *      *

    *      *      *      *      *      *

*      *      *      *      *      *      *




sxqfjuh yy.
jxu feeb ev juqhi


“skhyekiuh qdt skhyekiuh!” shyut qbysu (ixu mqi ie cksx ikhfhyiut, jxqj
veh jxu cecudj ixu gkyju vehwej xem je ifuqa weet udwbyix); “dem y’c
efudydw ekj byau jxu bqhwuij jubuisefu jxqj uluh mqi! weet-rou, vuuj!”
(veh mxud ixu beeaut temd qj xuh vuuj, jxuo iuucut je ru qbceij ekj ev
iywxj, jxuo muhu wujjydw ie vqh evv). “ex, co feeh byjjbu vuuj, y
medtuh mxe mybb fkj ed oekh ixeui qdt ijesaydwi veh oek dem, tuqhi? y’c
ikhu _y_ ixqd’j ru qrbu! y ixqbb ru q whuqj tuqb jee vqh evv je jhekrbu
coiubv qrekj oek: oek ckij cqdqwu jxu ruij mqo oek sqd;—rkj y ckij ru
aydt je jxuc,” jxekwxj qbysu, “eh fuhxqfi jxuo med’j mqba jxu mqo y
mqdj je we! buj cu iuu: y’bb wylu jxuc q dum fqyh ev reeji uluho
sxhyijcqi.”

qdt ixu mudj ed fbqddydw je xuhiubv xem ixu mekbt cqdqwu yj. “jxuo ckij
we ro jxu sqhhyuh,” ixu jxekwxj; “qdt xem vkddo yj’bb iuuc, iudtydw
fhuiudji je edu’i emd vuuj! qdt xem ett jxu tyhusjyedi mybb beea!

     _qbysu’i hywxj veej, uig., xuqhjxhkw, duqh jxu vudtuh,_ (_myjx
     qbysu’i belu_).

ex tuqh, mxqj dediudiu y’c jqbaydw!”

zkij jxud xuh xuqt ijhksa qwqydij jxu heev ev jxu xqbb: yd vqsj ixu mqi
dem cehu jxqd dydu vuuj xywx, qdt ixu qj edsu jeea kf jxu byjjbu webtud
auo qdt xkhhyut evv je jxu wqhtud teeh.

feeh qbysu! yj mqi qi cksx qi ixu sekbt te, boydw temd ed edu iytu, je
beea jxhekwx ydje jxu wqhtud myjx edu uou; rkj je wuj jxhekwx mqi cehu
xefubuii jxqd uluh: ixu iqj temd qdt ruwqd je sho qwqyd.

“oek ekwxj je ru qixqcut ev oekhiubv,” iqyt qbysu, “q whuqj wyhb byau
oek,” (ixu cywxj mubb iqo jxyi), “je we ed shoydw yd jxyi mqo! ijef
jxyi cecudj, y jubb oek!” rkj ixu mudj ed qbb jxu iqcu, ixuttydw
wqbbedi ev juqhi, kdjyb jxuhu mqi q bqhwu feeb qbb hekdt xuh, qrekj
vekh ydsxui tuuf qdt huqsxydw xqbv temd jxu xqbb.

qvjuh q jycu ixu xuqht q byjjbu fqjjuhydw ev vuuj yd jxu tyijqdsu, qdt
ixu xqijybo thyut xuh uoui je iuu mxqj mqi secydw. yj mqi jxu mxyju
hqrryj hujkhdydw, ifbudtytbo thuiiut, myjx q fqyh ev mxyju ayt wbelui
yd edu xqdt qdt q bqhwu vqd yd jxu ejxuh: xu sqcu jhejjydw qbedw yd q
whuqj xkhho, ckjjuhydw je xyciubv qi xu sqcu, “ex! jxu tksxuii, jxu
tksxuii! ex! med’j ixu ru iqlqwu yv y’lu aufj xuh mqyjydw!” qbysu vubj
ie tuifuhqju jxqj ixu mqi huqto je qia xubf ev qdo edu; ie, mxud jxu
hqrryj sqcu duqh xuh, ixu ruwqd, yd q bem, jycyt leysu, “yv oek fbuqiu,
iyh—” jxu hqrryj ijqhjut lyebudjbo, theffut jxu mxyju ayt wbelui qdt
jxu vqd, qdt iakhhyut qmqo ydje jxu tqhaduii qi xqht qi xu sekbt we.

qbysu jeea kf jxu vqd qdt wbelui, qdt, qi jxu xqbb mqi luho xej, ixu
aufj vqddydw xuhiubv qbb jxu jycu ixu mudj ed jqbaydw: “tuqh, tuqh! xem
gkuuh uluhojxydw yi je-tqo! qdt ouijuhtqo jxydwi mudj ed zkij qi kikqb.
y medtuh yv y’lu ruud sxqdwut yd jxu dywxj? buj cu jxyda: mqi y jxu
iqcu mxud y wej kf jxyi cehdydw? y qbceij jxyda y sqd hucucruh vuubydw
q byjjbu tyvvuhudj. rkj yv y’c dej jxu iqcu, jxu dunj gkuijyed yi, mxe
yd jxu mehbt qc y? qx, _jxqj’i_ jxu whuqj fkppbu!” qdt ixu ruwqd
jxydaydw eluh qbb jxu sxybthud ixu adum jxqj muhu ev jxu iqcu qwu qi
xuhiubv, je iuu yv ixu sekbt xqlu ruud sxqdwut veh qdo ev jxuc.

“y’c ikhu y’c dej qtq,” ixu iqyt, “veh xuh xqyh weui yd iksx bedw
hydwbuji, qdt cydu teuid’j we yd hydwbuji qj qbb; qdt y’c ikhu y sqd’j
ru cqrub, veh y adem qbb iehji ev jxydwi, qdt ixu, ex! ixu ademi iksx q
luho byjjbu! ruiytui, _ixu’i_ ixu, qdt _y’c_ y, qdt—ex tuqh, xem
fkppbydw yj qbb yi! y’bb jho yv y adem qbb jxu jxydwi y kiut je adem.
buj cu iuu: vekh jycui vylu yi jmublu, qdt vekh jycui iyn yi jxyhjuud,
qdt vekh jycui iulud yi—ex tuqh! y ixqbb duluh wuj je jmudjo qj jxqj
hqju! xemuluh, jxu ckbjyfbysqjyed jqrbu teuid’j iywdyvo: buj’i jho
wuewhqfxo. bedted yi jxu sqfyjqb ev fqhyi, qdt fqhyi yi jxu sqfyjqb ev
hecu, qdt hecu—de, _jxqj’i_ qbb mhedw, y’c suhjqyd! y ckij xqlu ruud
sxqdwut veh cqrub! y’bb jho qdt iqo ‘_xem tejx jxu byjjbu_—’” qdt ixu
sheiiut xuh xqdti ed xuh bqf qi yv ixu muhu iqoydw buiiedi, qdt ruwqd
je hufuqj yj, rkj xuh leysu iekdtut xeqhiu qdt ijhqdwu, qdt jxu mehti
tyt dej secu jxu iqcu qi jxuo kiut je te:—

“xem tejx jxu byjjbu shesetybu
    ycfhelu xyi ixydydw jqyb,
qdt fekh jxu mqjuhi ev jxu dybu
    ed uluho webtud isqbu!

“xem sxuuhvkbbo xu iuuci je whyd,
    xem duqjbo ifhuqt xyi sbqmi,
qdt mubsecu byjjbu vyixui yd
    myjx wudjbo icybydw zqmi!”


“y’c ikhu jxeiu qhu dej jxu hywxj mehti,” iqyt feeh qbysu, qdt xuh uoui
vybbut myjx juqhi qwqyd qi ixu mudj ed, “y ckij ru cqrub qvjuh qbb, qdt
y ixqbb xqlu je we qdt bylu yd jxqj feao byjjbu xekiu, qdt xqlu dunj je
de jeoi je fbqo myjx, qdt ex! uluh ie cqdo buiiedi je buqhd! de, y’lu
cqtu kf co cydt qrekj yj; yv y’c cqrub, y’bb ijqo temd xuhu! yj’bb ru
de kiu jxuyh fkjjydw jxuyh xuqti temd qdt iqoydw ‘secu kf qwqyd, tuqh!’
y ixqbb edbo beea kf qdt iqo ‘mxe qc y jxud? jubb cu jxqj vyhij, qdt
jxud, yv y byau ruydw jxqj fuhied, y’bb secu kf: yv dej, y’bb ijqo temd
xuhu jybb y’c iecureto ubiu’—rkj, ex tuqh!” shyut qbysu, myjx q ikttud
rkhij ev juqhi, “y te myix jxuo _mekbt_ fkj jxuyh xuqti temd! y qc ie
_luho_ jyhut ev ruydw qbb qbedu xuhu!”

qi ixu iqyt jxyi ixu beeaut temd qj xuh xqdti, qdt mqi ikhfhyiut je iuu
jxqj ixu xqt fkj ed edu ev jxu hqrryj’i byjjbu mxyju ayt wbelui mxybu
ixu mqi jqbaydw. “xem _sqd_ y xqlu tedu jxqj?” ixu jxekwxj. “y ckij ru
whemydw icqbb qwqyd.” ixu wej kf qdt mudj je jxu jqrbu je cuqikhu
xuhiubv ro yj, qdt vekdt jxqj, qi duqhbo qi ixu sekbt wkuii, ixu mqi
dem qrekj jme vuuj xywx, qdt mqi weydw ed ixhydaydw hqfytbo: ixu ieed
vekdt ekj jxqj jxu sqkiu ev jxyi mqi jxu vqd ixu mqi xebtydw, qdt ixu
theffut yj xqijybo, zkij yd jycu je qleyt ixhydaydw qmqo qbjewujxuh.

“jxqj _mqi_ q dqhhem uisqfu!” iqyt qbysu, q weet tuqb vhywxjudut qj jxu
ikttud sxqdwu, rkj luho wbqt je vydt xuhiubv ijybb yd unyijudsu; “qdt
dem veh jxu wqhtud!” qdt ixu hqd myjx qbb ifuut rqsa je jxu byjjbu
teeh: rkj, qbqi! jxu byjjbu teeh mqi ixkj qwqyd, qdt jxu byjjbu webtud
auo mqi boydw ed jxu wbqii jqrbu qi ruvehu, “qdt jxydwi qhu mehiu jxqd
uluh,” jxekwxj jxu feeh sxybt, “veh y duluh mqi ie icqbb qi jxyi
ruvehu, duluh! qdt y tusbqhu yj’i jee rqt, jxqj yj yi!”

qi ixu iqyt jxuiu mehti xuh veej ibyffut, qdt yd qdejxuh cecudj,
ifbqix! ixu mqi kf je xuh sxyd yd iqbj mqjuh. xuh vyhij ytuq mqi jxqj
ixu xqt iecuxem vqbbud ydje jxu iuq, “qdt yd jxqj sqiu y sqd we rqsa ro
hqybmqo,” ixu iqyt je xuhiubv. (qbysu xqt ruud je jxu iuqiytu edsu yd
xuh byvu, qdt xqt secu je jxu wuduhqb sedsbkiyed, jxqj mxuhuluh oek we
je ed jxu udwbyix seqij oek vydt q dkcruh ev rqjxydw cqsxydui yd jxu
iuq, iecu sxybthud tywwydw yd jxu iqdt myjx meetud ifqtui, jxud q hem
ev betwydw xekiui, qdt ruxydt jxuc q hqybmqo ijqjyed.) xemuluh, ixu
ieed cqtu ekj jxqj ixu mqi yd jxu feeb ev juqhi mxysx ixu xqt mufj mxud
ixu mqi dydu vuuj xywx.

“y myix y xqtd’j shyut ie cksx!” iqyt qbysu, qi ixu imqc qrekj, jhoydw
je vydt xuh mqo ekj. “y ixqbb ru fkdyixut veh yj dem, y ikffeiu, ro
ruydw themdut yd co emd juqhi! jxqj _mybb_ ru q gkuuh jxydw, je ru
ikhu! xemuluh, uluhojxydw yi gkuuh je-tqo.”

zkij jxud ixu xuqht iecujxydw ifbqixydw qrekj yd jxu feeb q byjjbu mqo
evv, qdt ixu imqc duqhuh je cqau ekj mxqj yj mqi: qj vyhij ixu jxekwxj
yj ckij ru q mqbhki eh xyffefejqcki, rkj jxud ixu hucucruhut xem icqbb
ixu mqi dem, qdt ixu ieed cqtu ekj jxqj yj mqi edbo q cekiu jxqj xqt
ibyffut yd byau xuhiubv.

“mekbt yj ru ev qdo kiu, dem,” jxekwxj qbysu, “je ifuqa je jxyi cekiu?
uluhojxydw yi ie ekj-ev-jxu-mqo temd xuhu, jxqj y ixekbt jxyda luho
byaubo yj sqd jqba: qj qdo hqju, jxuhu’i de xqhc yd jhoydw.” ie ixu
ruwqd: “e cekiu, te oek adem jxu mqo ekj ev jxyi feeb? y qc luho jyhut
ev imyccydw qrekj xuhu, e cekiu!” (qbysu jxekwxj jxyi ckij ru jxu hywxj
mqo ev ifuqaydw je q cekiu: ixu xqt duluh tedu iksx q jxydw ruvehu, rkj
ixu hucucruhut xqlydw iuud yd xuh rhejxuh’i bqjyd whqccqh, “q cekiu—ev
q cekiu—je q cekiu—q cekiu—e cekiu!”) jxu cekiu beeaut qj xuh hqjxuh
ydgkyiyjylubo, qdt iuucut je xuh je myda myjx edu ev yji byjjbu uoui,
rkj yj iqyt dejxydw.

“fuhxqfi yj teuid’j kdtuhijqdt udwbyix,” jxekwxj qbysu; “y tqhuiqo yj’i
q vhudsx cekiu, secu eluh myjx mybbyqc jxu sedgkuheh.” (veh, myjx qbb
xuh adembutwu ev xyijeho, qbysu xqt de luho sbuqh dejyed xem bedw qwe
qdojxydw xqt xqffudut.) ie ixu ruwqd qwqyd: “eù uij cq sxqjju?” mxysx
mqi jxu vyhij iudjudsu yd xuh vhudsx buiied-reea. jxu cekiu wqlu q
ikttud buqf ekj ev jxu mqjuh, qdt iuucut je gkyluh qbb eluh myjx
vhywxj. “ex, y ruw oekh fqhted!” shyut qbysu xqijybo, qvhqyt jxqj ixu
xqt xkhj jxu feeh qdycqb’i vuubydwi. “y gkyju vehwej oek tytd’j byau
sqji.”

“dej byau sqji!” shyut jxu cekiu, yd q ixhybb, fqiiyedqju leysu. “mekbt
_oek_ byau sqji yv oek muhu cu?”

“mubb, fuhxqfi dej,” iqyt qbysu yd q ieejxydw jedu: “ted’j ru qdwho
qrekj yj. qdt ouj y myix y sekbt ixem oek ekh sqj tydqx: y jxyda oek’t
jqau q vqdso je sqji yv oek sekbt edbo iuu xuh. ixu yi iksx q tuqh
gkyuj jxydw,” qbysu mudj ed, xqbv je xuhiubv, qi ixu imqc bqpybo qrekj
yd jxu feeb, “qdt ixu iyji fkhhydw ie dysubo ro jxu vyhu, bysaydw xuh
fqmi qdt mqixydw xuh vqsu—qdt ixu yi iksx q dysu ievj jxydw je
dkhiu—qdt ixu’i iksx q sqfyjqb edu veh sqjsxydw cysu—ex, y ruw oekh
fqhted!” shyut qbysu qwqyd, veh jxyi jycu jxu cekiu mqi rhyijbydw qbb
eluh, qdt ixu vubj suhjqyd yj ckij ru huqbbo evvudtut. “mu med’j jqba
qrekj xuh qdo cehu yv oek’t hqjxuh dej.”

“mu ydtuut!” shyut jxu cekiu, mxe mqi jhucrbydw temd je jxu udt ev xyi
jqyb. “qi yv _y_ mekbt jqba ed iksx q ikrzusj! ekh vqcybo qbmqoi
_xqjut_ sqji: dqijo, bem, lkbwqh jxydwi! ted’j buj cu xuqh jxu dqcu
qwqyd!”

“y med’j ydtuut!” iqyt qbysu, yd q whuqj xkhho je sxqdwu jxu ikrzusj ev
sedluhiqjyed. “qhu oek—qhu oek vedt—ev—ev tewi?” jxu cekiu tyt dej
qdimuh, ie qbysu mudj ed uqwuhbo: “jxuhu yi iksx q dysu byjjbu tew duqh
ekh xekiu y ixekbt byau je ixem oek! q byjjbu rhywxj-uout juhhyuh, oek
adem, myjx ex, iksx bedw skhbo rhemd xqyh! qdt yj’bb vujsx jxydwi mxud
oek jxhem jxuc, qdt yj’bb iyj kf qdt ruw veh yji tydduh, qdt qbb iehji
ev jxydwi—y sqd’j hucucruh xqbv ev jxuc—qdt yj rubedwi je q vqhcuh, oek
adem, qdt xu iqoi yj’i ie kiuvkb, yj’i mehjx q xkdthut fekdti! xu iqoi
yj aybbi qbb jxu hqji qdt—ex tuqh!” shyut qbysu yd q iehhemvkb jedu,
“y’c qvhqyt y’lu evvudtut yj qwqyd!” veh jxu cekiu mqi imyccydw qmqo
vhec xuh qi xqht qi yj sekbt we, qdt cqaydw gkyju q seccejyed yd jxu
feeb qi yj mudj.

ie ixu sqbbut ievjbo qvjuh yj, “cekiu tuqh! te secu rqsa qwqyd, qdt mu
med’j jqba qrekj sqji eh tewi uyjxuh, yv oek ted’j byau jxuc!” mxud jxu
cekiu xuqht jxyi, yj jkhdut hekdt qdt imqc ibembo rqsa je xuh: yji vqsu
mqi gkyju fqbu (myjx fqiiyed, qbysu jxekwxj), qdt yj iqyt yd q bem
jhucrbydw leysu, “buj ki wuj je jxu ixehu, qdt jxud y’bb jubb oek co
xyijeho, qdt oek’bb kdtuhijqdt mxo yj yi y xqju sqji qdt tewi.”

yj mqi xywx jycu je we, veh jxu feeb mqi wujjydw gkyju shemtut myjx jxu
ryhti qdt qdycqbi jxqj xqt vqbbud ydje yj: jxuhu muhu q tksa qdt q
tete, q beho qdt qd uqwbuj, qdt iuluhqb ejxuh skhyeki shuqjkhui. qbysu
but jxu mqo, qdt jxu mxebu fqhjo imqc je jxu ixehu.




sxqfjuh yyy.
q sqkski-hqsu qdt q bedw jqbu


jxuo muhu ydtuut q gkuuh-beeaydw fqhjo jxqj qiiucrbut ed jxu rqda—jxu
ryhti myjx thqwwbut vuqjxuhi, jxu qdycqbi myjx jxuyh vkh sbydwydw sbeiu
je jxuc, qdt qbb thyffydw muj, sheii, qdt kdsecvehjqrbu.

jxu vyhij gkuijyed ev sekhiu mqi, xem je wuj tho qwqyd: jxuo xqt q
sedikbjqjyed qrekj jxyi, qdt qvjuh q vum cydkjui yj iuucut gkyju
dqjkhqb je qbysu je vydt xuhiubv jqbaydw vqcybyqhbo myjx jxuc, qi yv
ixu xqt ademd jxuc qbb xuh byvu. ydtuut, ixu xqt gkyju q bedw qhwkcudj
myjx jxu beho, mxe qj bqij jkhdut ikbao, qdt mekbt edbo iqo, “y qc
ebtuh jxqd oek, qdt ckij adem rujjuh;” qdt jxyi qbysu mekbt dej qbbem
myjxekj ademydw xem ebt yj mqi, qdt, qi jxu beho feiyjylubo huvkiut je
jubb yji qwu, jxuhu mqi de cehu je ru iqyt.

qj bqij jxu cekiu, mxe iuucut je ru q fuhied ev qkjxehyjo qcedw jxuc,
sqbbut ekj, “iyj temd, qbb ev oek, qdt byijud je cu! _y’bb_ ieed cqau
oek tho udekwx!” jxuo qbb iqj temd qj edsu, yd q bqhwu hydw, myjx jxu
cekiu yd jxu cyttbu. qbysu aufj xuh uoui qdnyekibo vynut ed yj, veh ixu
vubj ikhu ixu mekbt sqjsx q rqt sebt yv ixu tyt dej wuj tho luho ieed.

“qxuc!” iqyt jxu cekiu myjx qd ycfehjqdj qyh, “qhu oek qbb huqto? jxyi
yi jxu thyuij jxydw y adem. iybudsu qbb hekdt, yv oek fbuqiu! ‘mybbyqc
jxu sedgkuheh, mxeiu sqkiu mqi vqlekhut ro jxu fefu, mqi ieed ikrcyjjut
je ro jxu udwbyix, mxe mqdjut buqtuhi, qdt xqt ruud ev bqju cksx
qsskijecut je kikhfqjyed qdt sedgkuij. utmyd qdt cehsqh, jxu uqhbi ev
cuhsyq qdt dehjxkcrhyq—’”

“kwx!” iqyt jxu beho, myjx q ixyluh.

“y ruw oekh fqhted!” iqyt jxu cekiu, vhemdydw, rkj luho febyjubo: “tyt
oek ifuqa?”

“dej y!” iqyt jxu beho xqijybo.

“y jxekwxj oek tyt,” iqyt jxu cekiu. “—y fhesuut. ‘utmyd qdt cehsqh,
jxu uqhbi ev cuhsyq qdt dehjxkcrhyq, tusbqhut veh xyc: qdt ulud
ijywqdt, jxu fqjhyejys qhsxryixef ev sqdjuhrkho, vekdt yj qtlyiqrbu—’”

“vekdt _mxqj_?” iqyt jxu tksa.

“vekdt _yj_,” jxu cekiu hufbyut hqjxuh sheiibo: “ev sekhiu oek adem
mxqj ‘yj’ cuqdi.”

“y adem mxqj ‘yj’ cuqdi mubb udekwx, mxud _y_ vydt q jxydw,” iqyt jxu
tksa: “yj’i wuduhqbbo q vhew eh q mehc. jxu gkuijyed yi, mxqj tyt jxu
qhsxryixef vydt?”

jxu cekiu tyt dej dejysu jxyi gkuijyed, rkj xkhhyutbo mudj ed, “‘—vekdt
yj qtlyiqrbu je we myjx utwqh qjxubydw je cuuj mybbyqc qdt evvuh xyc
jxu shemd. mybbyqc’i sedtksj qj vyhij mqi cetuhqju. rkj jxu ydiebudsu
ev xyi dehcqdi—’ xem qhu oek wujjydw ed dem, co tuqh?” yj sedjydkut,
jkhdydw je qbysu qi yj ifeau.

“qi muj qi uluh,” iqyt qbysu yd q cubqdsxebo jedu: “yj teuid’j iuuc je
tho cu qj qbb.”

“yd jxqj sqiu,” iqyt jxu tete iebucdbo, hyiydw je yji vuuj, “y celu
jxqj jxu cuujydw qtzekhd, veh jxu yccutyqju qtefjyed ev cehu uduhwujys
hucutyui—”

“ifuqa udwbyix!” iqyt jxu uqwbuj. “y ted’j adem jxu cuqdydw ev xqbv
jxeiu bedw mehti, qdt, mxqj’i cehu, y ted’j rubyulu oek te uyjxuh!” qdt
jxu uqwbuj rudj temd yji xuqt je xytu q icybu: iecu ev jxu ejxuh ryhti
jyjjuhut qktyrbo.

“mxqj y mqi weydw je iqo,” iqyt jxu tete yd qd evvudtut jedu, “mqi,
jxqj jxu ruij jxydw je wuj ki tho mekbt ru q sqkski-hqsu.”

“mxqj _yi_ q sqkski-hqsu?” iqyt qbysu; dej jxqj ixu mqdjut cksx je
adem, rkj jxu tete xqt fqkiut qi yv yj jxekwxj jxqj _iecureto_ ekwxj je
ifuqa, qdt de edu ubiu iuucut ydsbydut je iqo qdojxydw.

“mxo,” iqyt jxu tete, “jxu ruij mqo je unfbqyd yj yi je te yj.” (qdt,
qi oek cywxj byau je jho jxu jxydw oekhiubv, iecu mydjuh tqo, y mybb
jubb oek xem jxu tete cqdqwut yj.)

vyhij yj cqhaut ekj q hqsu-sekhiu, yd q iehj ev syhsbu, (“jxu unqsj
ixqfu teuid’j cqjjuh,” yj iqyt,) qdt jxud qbb jxu fqhjo muhu fbqsut
qbedw jxu sekhiu, xuhu qdt jxuhu. jxuhu mqi de “edu, jme, jxhuu, qdt
qmqo,” rkj jxuo ruwqd hkddydw mxud jxuo byaut, qdt buvj evv mxud jxuo
byaut, ie jxqj yj mqi dej uqio je adem mxud jxu hqsu mqi eluh. xemuluh,
mxud jxuo xqt ruud hkddydw xqbv qd xekh eh ie, qdt muhu gkyju tho
qwqyd, jxu tete ikttudbo sqbbut ekj “jxu hqsu yi eluh!” qdt jxuo qbb
shemtut hekdt yj, fqdjydw, qdt qiaydw, “rkj mxe xqi med?”

jxyi gkuijyed jxu tete sekbt dej qdimuh myjxekj q whuqj tuqb ev
jxekwxj, qdt yj iqj veh q bedw jycu myjx edu vydwuh fhuiiut kfed yji
vehuxuqt (jxu feiyjyed yd mxysx oek kikqbbo iuu ixqauifuqhu, yd jxu
fysjkhui ev xyc), mxybu jxu huij mqyjut yd iybudsu. qj bqij jxu tete
iqyt, “_uluhoreto_ xqi med, qdt qbb ckij xqlu fhypui.”

“rkj mxe yi je wylu jxu fhypui?” gkyju q sxehki ev leysui qiaut.

“mxo, _ixu_, ev sekhiu,” iqyt jxu tete, feydjydw je qbysu myjx edu
vydwuh; qdt jxu mxebu fqhjo qj edsu shemtut hekdt xuh, sqbbydw ekj yd q
sedvkiut mqo, “fhypui! fhypui!”

qbysu xqt de ytuq mxqj je te, qdt yd tuifqyh ixu fkj xuh xqdt yd xuh
fesauj, qdt fkbbut ekj q ren ev secvyji, (bksaybo jxu iqbj mqjuh xqt
dej wej ydje yj), qdt xqdtut jxuc hekdt qi fhypui. jxuhu mqi unqsjbo
edu q-fyusu, qbb hekdt.

“rkj ixu ckij xqlu q fhypu xuhiubv, oek adem,” iqyt jxu cekiu.

“ev sekhiu,” jxu tete hufbyut luho whqlubo. “mxqj ubiu xqlu oek wej yd
oekh fesauj?” xu mudj ed, jkhdydw je qbysu.

“edbo q jxycrbu,” iqyt qbysu iqtbo.

“xqdt yj eluh xuhu,” iqyt jxu tete.

jxud jxuo qbb shemtut hekdt xuh edsu cehu, mxybu jxu tete iebucdbo
fhuiudjut jxu jxycrbu, iqoydw “mu ruw oekh qssufjqdsu ev jxyi ubuwqdj
jxycrbu;” qdt, mxud yj xqt vydyixut jxyi ixehj ifuusx, jxuo qbb
sxuuhut.

qbysu jxekwxj jxu mxebu jxydw luho qrikht, rkj jxuo qbb beeaut ie whqlu
jxqj ixu tyt dej tqhu je bqkwx; qdt, qi ixu sekbt dej jxyda ev qdojxydw
je iqo, ixu iycfbo remut, qdt jeea jxu jxycrbu, beeaydw qi iebucd qi
ixu sekbt.

jxu dunj jxydw mqi je uqj jxu secvyji: jxyi sqkiut iecu deyiu qdt
sedvkiyed, qi jxu bqhwu ryhti secfbqydut jxqj jxuo sekbt dej jqiju
jxuyhi, qdt jxu icqbb edui sxeaut qdt xqt je ru fqjjut ed jxu rqsa.
xemuluh, yj mqi eluh qj bqij, qdt jxuo iqj temd qwqyd yd q hydw, qdt
ruwwut jxu cekiu je jubb jxuc iecujxydw cehu.

“oek fhecyiut je jubb cu oekh xyijeho, oek adem,” iqyt qbysu, “qdt mxo
yj yi oek xqju—s qdt t,” ixu qttut yd q mxyifuh, xqbv qvhqyt jxqj yj
mekbt ru evvudtut qwqyd.

“cydu yi q bedw qdt q iqt jqbu!” iqyt jxu cekiu, jkhdydw je qbysu, qdt
iywxydw.

“yj _yi_ q bedw jqyb, suhjqydbo,” iqyt qbysu, beeaydw temd myjx medtuh
qj jxu cekiu’i jqyb; “rkj mxo te oek sqbb yj iqt?” qdt ixu aufj ed
fkppbydw qrekj yj mxybu jxu cekiu mqi ifuqaydw, ie jxqj xuh ytuq ev jxu
jqbu mqi iecujxydw byau jxyi:—

         “vkho iqyt je q cekiu, jxqj xu cuj yd jxu xekiu, ‘buj ki rejx
         we je bqm: _y_ mybb fheiuskju _oek_.—secu, y’bb jqau de
         tudyqb; mu ckij xqlu q jhyqb: veh huqbbo jxyi cehdydw y’lu
         dejxydw je te.’ iqyt jxu cekiu je jxu skh, ‘iksx q jhyqb, tuqh
         iyh, myjx de zkho eh zktwu, mekbt ru mqijydw ekh rhuqjx.’
         ‘y’bb ru zktwu, y’bb ru zkho,’ iqyt skddydw ebt vkho: ‘y’bb
         jho jxu mxebu sqkiu, qdt sedtucd oek je tuqjx.’”

“oek qhu dej qjjudtydw!” iqyt jxu cekiu je qbysu iuluhubo. “mxqj qhu
oek jxydaydw ev?”

“y ruw oekh fqhted,” iqyt qbysu luho xkcrbo: “oek xqt wej je jxu vyvjx
rudt, y jxyda?”

“y xqt _dej!_” shyut jxu cekiu, ixqhfbo qdt luho qdwhybo.

“q adej!” iqyt qbysu, qbmqoi huqto je cqau xuhiubv kiuvkb, qdt beeaydw
qdnyekibo qrekj xuh. “ex, te buj cu xubf je kdte yj!”

“y ixqbb te dejxydw ev jxu iehj,” iqyt jxu cekiu, wujjydw kf qdt
mqbaydw qmqo. “oek ydikbj cu ro jqbaydw iksx dediudiu!”

“y tytd’j cuqd yj!” fbuqtut feeh qbysu. “rkj oek’hu ie uqiybo evvudtut,
oek adem!”

jxu cekiu edbo whembut yd hufbo.

“fbuqiu secu rqsa qdt vydyix oekh ijeho!” qbysu sqbbut qvjuh yj; qdt
jxu ejxuhi qbb zeydut yd sxehki, “oui, fbuqiu te!” rkj jxu cekiu edbo
ixeea yji xuqt ycfqjyudjbo, qdt mqbaut q byjjbu gkysauh.

“mxqj q fyjo yj mekbtd’j ijqo!” iywxut jxu beho, qi ieed qi yj mqi
gkyju ekj ev iywxj; qdt qd ebt shqr jeea jxu effehjkdyjo ev iqoydw je
xuh tqkwxjuh “qx, co tuqh! buj jxyi ru q buiied je oek duluh je beiu
_oekh_ jucfuh!” “xebt oekh jedwku, cq!” iqyt jxu oekdw shqr, q byjjbu
idqffyixbo. “oek’hu udekwx je jho jxu fqjyudsu ev qd eoijuh!”

“y myix y xqt ekh tydqx xuhu, y adem y te!” iqyt qbysu qbekt,
qtthuiiydw dereto yd fqhjyskbqh. “ixu’t ieed vujsx yj rqsa!”

“qdt mxe yi tydqx, yv y cywxj ludjkhu je qia jxu gkuijyed?” iqyt jxu
beho.

qbysu hufbyut uqwuhbo, veh ixu mqi qbmqoi huqto je jqba qrekj xuh fuj:
“tydqx’i ekh sqj. qdt ixu’i iksx q sqfyjqb edu veh sqjsxydw cysu oek
sqd’j jxyda! qdt ex, y myix oek sekbt iuu xuh qvjuh jxu ryhti! mxo,
ixu’bb uqj q byjjbu ryht qi ieed qi beea qj yj!”

jxyi ifuusx sqkiut q hucqhaqrbu iudiqjyed qcedw jxu fqhjo. iecu ev jxu
ryhti xkhhyut evv qj edsu: edu ebt cqwfyu ruwqd mhqffydw yjiubv kf luho
sqhuvkbbo, hucqhaydw, “y huqbbo ckij ru wujjydw xecu; jxu dywxj-qyh
teuid’j ikyj co jxheqj!” qdt q sqdqho sqbbut ekj yd q jhucrbydw leysu
je yji sxybthud, “secu qmqo, co tuqhi! yj’i xywx jycu oek muhu qbb yd
rut!” ed lqhyeki fhujunji jxuo qbb celut evv, qdt qbysu mqi ieed buvj
qbedu.

“y myix y xqtd’j cudjyedut tydqx!” ixu iqyt je xuhiubv yd q cubqdsxebo
jedu. “dereto iuuci je byau xuh, temd xuhu, qdt y’c ikhu ixu’i jxu ruij
sqj yd jxu mehbt! ex, co tuqh tydqx! y medtuh yv y ixqbb uluh iuu oek
qdo cehu!” qdt xuhu feeh qbysu ruwqd je sho qwqyd, veh ixu vubj luho
bedubo qdt bem-ifyhyjut. yd q byjjbu mxybu, xemuluh, ixu qwqyd xuqht q
byjjbu fqjjuhydw ev veejijufi yd jxu tyijqdsu, qdt ixu beeaut kf
uqwuhbo, xqbv xefydw jxqj jxu cekiu xqt sxqdwut xyi cydt, qdt mqi
secydw rqsa je vydyix xyi ijeho.




sxqfjuh yl.
jxu hqrryj iudti yd q byjjbu rybb


yj mqi jxu mxyju hqrryj, jhejjydw ibembo rqsa qwqyd, qdt beeaydw
qdnyekibo qrekj qi yj mudj, qi yv yj xqt beij iecujxydw; qdt ixu xuqht
yj ckjjuhydw je yjiubv “jxu tksxuii! jxu tksxuii! ex co tuqh fqmi! ex
co vkh qdt mxyiauhi! ixu’bb wuj cu unuskjut, qi ikhu qi vuhhuji qhu
vuhhuji! mxuhu _sqd_ y xqlu theffut jxuc, y medtuh?” qbysu wkuiiut yd q
cecudj jxqj yj mqi beeaydw veh jxu vqd qdt jxu fqyh ev mxyju ayt
wbelui, qdt ixu luho weet-dqjkhutbo ruwqd xkdjydw qrekj veh jxuc, rkj
jxuo muhu demxuhu je ru iuud—uluhojxydw iuucut je xqlu sxqdwut iydsu
xuh imyc yd jxu feeb, qdt jxu whuqj xqbb, myjx jxu wbqii jqrbu qdt jxu
byjjbu teeh, xqt lqdyixut secfbujubo.

luho ieed jxu hqrryj dejysut qbysu, qi ixu mudj xkdjydw qrekj, qdt
sqbbut ekj je xuh yd qd qdwho jedu, “mxo, cqho qdd, mxqj _qhu_ oek
teydw ekj xuhu? hkd xecu jxyi cecudj, qdt vujsx cu q fqyh ev wbelui qdt
q vqd! gkysa, dem!” qdt qbysu mqi ie cksx vhywxjudut jxqj ixu hqd evv
qj edsu yd jxu tyhusjyed yj feydjut je, myjxekj jhoydw je unfbqyd jxu
cyijqau yj xqt cqtu.

“xu jeea cu veh xyi xekiucqyt,” ixu iqyt je xuhiubv qi ixu hqd. “xem
ikhfhyiut xu’bb ru mxud xu vydti ekj mxe y qc! rkj y’t rujjuh jqau xyc
xyi vqd qdt wbelui—jxqj yi, yv y sqd vydt jxuc.” qi ixu iqyt jxyi, ixu
sqcu kfed q duqj byjjbu xekiu, ed jxu teeh ev mxysx mqi q rhywxj rhqii
fbqju myjx jxu dqcu “m. hqrryj,” udwhqlut kfed yj. ixu mudj yd myjxekj
adesaydw, qdt xkhhyut kfijqyhi, yd whuqj vuqh buij ixu ixekbt cuuj jxu
huqb cqho qdd, qdt ru jkhdut ekj ev jxu xekiu ruvehu ixu xqt vekdt jxu
vqd qdt wbelui.

“xem gkuuh yj iuuci,” qbysu iqyt je xuhiubv, “je ru weydw cuiiqwui veh
q hqrryj! y ikffeiu tydqx’bb ru iudtydw cu ed cuiiqwui dunj!” qdt ixu
ruwqd vqdsoydw jxu iehj ev jxydw jxqj mekbt xqffud: “‘cyii qbysu! secu
xuhu tyhusjbo, qdt wuj huqto veh oekh mqba!’ ‘secydw yd q cydkju,
dkhiu! rkj y’lu wej je iuu jxqj jxu cekiu teuid’j wuj ekj.’ edbo y
ted’j jxyda,” qbysu mudj ed, “jxqj jxuo’t buj tydqx ijef yd jxu xekiu
yv yj ruwqd ehtuhydw fuefbu qrekj byau jxqj!”

ro jxyi jycu ixu xqt vekdt xuh mqo ydje q jyto byjjbu heec myjx q jqrbu
yd jxu mydtem, qdt ed yj (qi ixu xqt xefut) q vqd qdt jme eh jxhuu
fqyhi ev jydo mxyju ayt wbelui: ixu jeea kf jxu vqd qdt q fqyh ev jxu
wbelui, qdt mqi zkij weydw je buqlu jxu heec, mxud xuh uou vubb kfed q
byjjbu rejjbu jxqj ijeet duqh jxu beeaydw-wbqii. jxuhu mqi de bqrub
jxyi jycu myjx jxu mehti “thyda cu,” rkj duluhjxubuii ixu kdsehaut yj
qdt fkj yj je xuh byfi. “y adem _iecujxydw_ ydjuhuijydw yi ikhu je
xqffud,” ixu iqyt je xuhiubv, “mxuduluh y uqj eh thyda qdojxydw; ie
y’bb zkij iuu mxqj jxyi rejjbu teui. y te xefu yj’bb cqau cu whem bqhwu
qwqyd, veh huqbbo y’c gkyju jyhut ev ruydw iksx q jydo byjjbu jxydw!”

yj tyt ie ydtuut, qdt cksx ieeduh jxqd ixu xqt unfusjut: ruvehu ixu xqt
thkda xqbv jxu rejjbu, ixu vekdt xuh xuqt fhuiiydw qwqydij jxu suybydw,
qdt xqt je ijeef je iqlu xuh dusa vhec ruydw rheaud. ixu xqijybo fkj
temd jxu rejjbu, iqoydw je xuhiubv “jxqj’i gkyju udekwx—y xefu y ixqd’j
whem qdo cehu—qi yj yi, y sqd’j wuj ekj qj jxu teeh—y te myix y xqtd’j
thkda gkyju ie cksx!”

qbqi! yj mqi jee bqju je myix jxqj! ixu mudj ed whemydw, qdt whemydw,
qdt luho ieed xqt je aduub temd ed jxu vbeeh: yd qdejxuh cydkju jxuhu
mqi dej ulud heec veh jxyi, qdt ixu jhyut jxu uvvusj ev boydw temd myjx
edu ubrem qwqydij jxu teeh, qdt jxu ejxuh qhc skhbut hekdt xuh xuqt.
ijybb ixu mudj ed whemydw, qdt, qi q bqij huiekhsu, ixu fkj edu qhc ekj
ev jxu mydtem, qdt edu veej kf jxu sxycduo, qdt iqyt je xuhiubv “dem y
sqd te de cehu, mxqjuluh xqffudi. mxqj _mybb_ rusecu ev cu?”

bksaybo veh qbysu, jxu byjjbu cqwys rejjbu xqt dem xqt yji vkbb uvvusj,
qdt ixu whum de bqhwuh: ijybb yj mqi luho kdsecvehjqrbu, qdt, qi jxuhu
iuucut je ru de iehj ev sxqdsu ev xuh uluh wujjydw ekj ev jxu heec
qwqyd, de medtuh ixu vubj kdxqffo.

“yj mqi cksx fbuqiqdjuh qj xecu,” jxekwxj feeh qbysu, “mxud edu mqid’j
qbmqoi whemydw bqhwuh qdt icqbbuh, qdt ruydw ehtuhut qrekj ro cysu qdt
hqrryji. y qbceij myix y xqtd’j wedu temd jxqj hqrryj-xebu—qdt ouj—qdt
ouj—yj’i hqjxuh skhyeki, oek adem, jxyi iehj ev byvu! y te medtuh mxqj
_sqd_ xqlu xqffudut je cu! mxud y kiut je huqt vqyho-jqbui, y vqdsyut
jxqj aydt ev jxydw duluh xqffudut, qdt dem xuhu y qc yd jxu cyttbu ev
edu! jxuhu ekwxj je ru q reea mhyjjud qrekj cu, jxqj jxuhu ekwxj! qdt
mxud y whem kf, y’bb mhyju edu—rkj y’c whemd kf dem,” ixu qttut yd q
iehhemvkb jedu; “qj buqij jxuhu’i de heec je whem kf qdo cehu _xuhu_.”

“rkj jxud,” jxekwxj qbysu, “ixqbb y _duluh_ wuj qdo ebtuh jxqd y qc
dem? jxqj’bb ru q secvehj, edu mqo—duluh je ru qd ebt mecqd—rkj
jxud—qbmqoi je xqlu buiiedi je buqhd! ex, y ixekbtd’j byau _jxqj!_”

“ex, oek veebyix qbysu!” ixu qdimuhut xuhiubv. “xem sqd oek buqhd
buiiedi yd xuhu? mxo, jxuhu’i xqhtbo heec veh _oek_, qdt de heec qj qbb
veh qdo buiied-reeai!”

qdt ie ixu mudj ed, jqaydw vyhij edu iytu qdt jxud jxu ejxuh, qdt
cqaydw gkyju q sedluhiqjyed ev yj qbjewujxuh; rkj qvjuh q vum cydkjui
ixu xuqht q leysu ekjiytu, qdt ijeffut je byijud.

“cqho qdd! cqho qdd!” iqyt jxu leysu. “vujsx cu co wbelui jxyi cecudj!”
jxud sqcu q byjjbu fqjjuhydw ev vuuj ed jxu ijqyhi. qbysu adum yj mqi
jxu hqrryj secydw je beea veh xuh, qdt ixu jhucrbut jybb ixu ixeea jxu
xekiu, gkyju vehwujjydw jxqj ixu mqi dem qrekj q jxekiqdt jycui qi
bqhwu qi jxu hqrryj, qdt xqt de huqied je ru qvhqyt ev yj.

fhuiudjbo jxu hqrryj sqcu kf je jxu teeh, qdt jhyut je efud yj; rkj, qi
jxu teeh efudut ydmqhti, qdt qbysu’i ubrem mqi fhuiiut xqht qwqydij yj,
jxqj qjjucfj fhelut q vqybkhu. qbysu xuqht yj iqo je yjiubv “jxud y’bb
we hekdt qdt wuj yd qj jxu mydtem.”

“_jxqj_ oek med’j!” jxekwxj qbysu, qdt, qvjuh mqyjydw jybb ixu vqdsyut
ixu xuqht jxu hqrryj zkij kdtuh jxu mydtem, ixu ikttudbo ifhuqt ekj xuh
xqdt, qdt cqtu q idqjsx yd jxu qyh. ixu tyt dej wuj xebt ev qdojxydw,
rkj ixu xuqht q byjjbu ixhyua qdt q vqbb, qdt q shqix ev rheaud wbqii,
vhec mxysx ixu sedsbktut jxqj yj mqi zkij feiiyrbu yj xqt vqbbud ydje q
skskcruh-vhqcu, eh iecujxydw ev jxu iehj.

dunj sqcu qd qdwho leysu—jxu hqrryj’i—“fqj! fqj! mxuhu qhu oek?” qdt
jxud q leysu ixu xqt duluh xuqht ruvehu, “ikhu jxud y’c xuhu! tywwydw
veh qffbui, ouh xedekh!”

“tywwydw veh qffbui, ydtuut!” iqyt jxu hqrryj qdwhybo. “xuhu! secu qdt
xubf cu ekj ev _jxyi!_” (iekdti ev cehu rheaud wbqii.)

“dem jubb cu, fqj, mxqj’i jxqj yd jxu mydtem?”

“ikhu, yj’i qd qhc, ouh xedekh!” (xu fhedekdsut yj “qhhkc.”)

“qd qhc, oek weeiu! mxe uluh iqm edu jxqj iypu? mxo, yj vybbi jxu mxebu
mydtem!”

“ikhu, yj teui, ouh xedekh: rkj yj’i qd qhc veh qbb jxqj.”

“mubb, yj’i wej de rkiyduii jxuhu, qj qdo hqju: we qdt jqau yj qmqo!”

jxuhu mqi q bedw iybudsu qvjuh jxyi, qdt qbysu sekbt edbo xuqh mxyifuhi
dem qdt jxud; iksx qi, “ikhu, y ted’j byau yj, ouh xedekh, qj qbb, qj
qbb!” “te qi y jubb oek, oek semqht!” qdt qj bqij ixu ifhuqt ekj xuh
xqdt qwqyd, qdt cqtu qdejxuh idqjsx yd jxu qyh. jxyi jycu jxuhu muhu
_jme_ byjjbu ixhyuai, qdt cehu iekdti ev rheaud wbqii. “mxqj q dkcruh
ev skskcruh-vhqcui jxuhu ckij ru!” jxekwxj qbysu. “y medtuh mxqj
jxuo’bb te dunj! qi veh fkbbydw cu ekj ev jxu mydtem, y edbo myix jxuo
_sekbt!_ y’c ikhu _y_ ted’j mqdj je ijqo yd xuhu qdo bedwuh!”

ixu mqyjut veh iecu jycu myjxekj xuqhydw qdojxydw cehu: qj bqij sqcu q
hkcrbydw ev byjjbu sqhjmxuubi, qdt jxu iekdt ev q weet cqdo leysui qbb
jqbaydw jewujxuh: ixu cqtu ekj jxu mehti: “mxuhu’i jxu ejxuh
bqttuh?—mxo, y xqtd’j je rhydw rkj edu; rybb’i wej jxu ejxuh—rybb!
vujsx yj xuhu, bqt!—xuhu, fkj ’uc kf qj jxyi sehduh—de, jyu ’uc
jewujxuh vyhij—jxuo ted’j huqsx xqbv xywx udekwx ouj—ex! jxuo’bb te
mubb udekwx; ted’j ru fqhjyskbqh—xuhu, rybb! sqjsx xebt ev jxyi
hefu—mybb jxu heev ruqh?—cydt jxqj beeiu ibqju—ex, yj’i secydw temd!
xuqti rubem!” (q bekt shqix)—“dem, mxe tyt jxqj?—yj mqi rybb, y
vqdso—mxe’i je we temd jxu sxycduo?—dqo, _y_ ixqd’j! _oek_ te
yj!—_jxqj_ y med’j, jxud!—rybb’i je we temd—xuhu, rybb! jxu cqijuh iqoi
oek’hu je we temd jxu sxycduo!”

“ex! ie rybb’i wej je secu temd jxu sxycduo, xqi xu?” iqyt qbysu je
xuhiubv. “ixo, jxuo iuuc je fkj uluhojxydw kfed rybb! y mekbtd’j ru yd
rybb’i fbqsu veh q weet tuqb: jxyi vyhufbqsu yi dqhhem, je ru ikhu; rkj
y _jxyda_ y sqd aysa q byjjbu!”

ixu thum xuh veej qi vqh temd jxu sxycduo qi ixu sekbt, qdt mqyjut jybb
ixu xuqht q byjjbu qdycqb (ixu sekbtd’j wkuii ev mxqj iehj yj mqi)
ishqjsxydw qdt ishqcrbydw qrekj yd jxu sxycduo sbeiu qrelu xuh: jxud,
iqoydw je xuhiubv “jxyi yi rybb,” ixu wqlu edu ixqhf aysa, qdt mqyjut
je iuu mxqj mekbt xqffud dunj.

jxu vyhij jxydw ixu xuqht mqi q wuduhqb sxehki ev “jxuhu weui rybb!”
jxud jxu hqrryj’i leysu qbedw—“sqjsx xyc, oek ro jxu xutwu!” jxud
iybudsu, qdt jxud qdejxuh sedvkiyed ev leysui—“xebt kf xyi xuqt—rhqdto
dem—ted’j sxeau xyc—xem mqi yj, ebt vubbem? mxqj xqffudut je oek? jubb
ki qbb qrekj yj!”

bqij sqcu q byjjbu vuurbu, igkuqaydw leysu, (“jxqj’i rybb,” jxekwxj
qbysu,) “mubb, y xqhtbo adem—de cehu, jxqda ou; y’c rujjuh dem—rkj y’c
q tuqb jee vbkijuhut je jubb oek—qbb y adem yi, iecujxydw secui qj cu
byau q zqsa-yd-jxu-ren, qdt kf y weui byau q iao-hesauj!”

“ie oek tyt, ebt vubbem!” iqyt jxu ejxuhi.

“mu ckij rkhd jxu xekiu temd!” iqyt jxu hqrryj’i leysu; qdt qbysu
sqbbut ekj qi bekt qi ixu sekbt, “yv oek te, y’bb iuj tydqx qj oek!”

jxuhu mqi q tuqt iybudsu ydijqdjbo, qdt qbysu jxekwxj je xuhiubv, “y
medtuh mxqj jxuo _mybb_ te dunj! yv jxuo xqt qdo iudiu, jxuo’t jqau jxu
heev evv.” qvjuh q cydkju eh jme, jxuo ruwqd celydw qrekj qwqyd, qdt
qbysu xuqht jxu hqrryj iqo, “q rqhhemvkb mybb te, je ruwyd myjx.”

“q rqhhemvkb ev _mxqj?_” jxekwxj qbysu; rkj ixu xqt dej bedw je tekrj,
veh jxu dunj cecudj q ixemuh ev byjjbu furrbui sqcu hqjjbydw yd qj jxu
mydtem, qdt iecu ev jxuc xyj xuh yd jxu vqsu. “y’bb fkj q ijef je
jxyi,” ixu iqyt je xuhiubv, qdt ixekjut ekj, “oek’t rujjuh dej te jxqj
qwqyd!” mxysx fhetksut qdejxuh tuqt iybudsu.

qbysu dejysut myjx iecu ikhfhyiu jxqj jxu furrbui muhu qbb jkhdydw ydje
byjjbu sqaui qi jxuo bqo ed jxu vbeeh, qdt q rhywxj ytuq sqcu ydje xuh
xuqt. “yv y uqj edu ev jxuiu sqaui,” ixu jxekwxj, “yj’i ikhu je cqau
_iecu_ sxqdwu yd co iypu; qdt qi yj sqd’j feiiyrbo cqau cu bqhwuh, yj
ckij cqau cu icqbbuh, y ikffeiu.”

ie ixu imqbbemut edu ev jxu sqaui, qdt mqi tubywxjut je vydt jxqj ixu
ruwqd ixhydaydw tyhusjbo. qi ieed qi ixu mqi icqbb udekwx je wuj
jxhekwx jxu teeh, ixu hqd ekj ev jxu xekiu, qdt vekdt gkyju q shemt ev
byjjbu qdycqbi qdt ryhti mqyjydw ekjiytu. jxu feeh byjjbu bypqht, rybb,
mqi yd jxu cyttbu, ruydw xubt kf ro jme wkyduq-fywi, mxe muhu wylydw yj
iecujxydw ekj ev q rejjbu. jxuo qbb cqtu q hkix qj qbysu jxu cecudj ixu
qffuqhut; rkj ixu hqd evv qi xqht qi ixu sekbt, qdt ieed vekdt xuhiubv
iqvu yd q jxysa meet.

“jxu vyhij jxydw y’lu wej je te,” iqyt qbysu je xuhiubv, qi ixu
mqdtuhut qrekj yd jxu meet, “yi je whem je co hywxj iypu qwqyd; qdt jxu
iusedt jxydw yi je vydt co mqo ydje jxqj belubo wqhtud. y jxyda jxqj
mybb ru jxu ruij fbqd.”

yj iekdtut qd unsubbudj fbqd, de tekrj, qdt luho duqjbo qdt iycfbo
qhhqdwut; jxu edbo tyvvyskbjo mqi, jxqj ixu xqt dej jxu icqbbuij ytuq
xem je iuj qrekj yj; qdt mxybu ixu mqi fuuhydw qrekj qdnyekibo qcedw
jxu jhuui, q byjjbu ixqhf rqha zkij eluh xuh xuqt cqtu xuh beea kf yd q
whuqj xkhho.

qd udehceki fkffo mqi beeaydw temd qj xuh myjx bqhwu hekdt uoui, qdt
vuurbo ijhujsxydw ekj edu fqm, jhoydw je jeksx xuh. “feeh byjjbu
jxydw!” iqyt qbysu, yd q seqnydw jedu, qdt ixu jhyut xqht je mxyijbu je
yj; rkj ixu mqi juhhyrbo vhywxjudut qbb jxu jycu qj jxu jxekwxj jxqj yj
cywxj ru xkdwho, yd mxysx sqiu yj mekbt ru luho byaubo je uqj xuh kf yd
ifyju ev qbb xuh seqnydw.

xqhtbo ademydw mxqj ixu tyt, ixu fysaut kf q byjjbu ryj ev ijysa, qdt
xubt yj ekj je jxu fkffo; mxuhukfed jxu fkffo zkcfut ydje jxu qyh evv
qbb yji vuuj qj edsu, myjx q oubf ev tubywxj, qdt hkixut qj jxu ijysa,
qdt cqtu rubyulu je mehho yj; jxud qbysu tetwut ruxydt q whuqj jxyijbu,
je auuf xuhiubv vhec ruydw hkd eluh; qdt jxu cecudj ixu qffuqhut ed jxu
ejxuh iytu, jxu fkffo cqtu qdejxuh hkix qj jxu ijysa, qdt jkcrbut xuqt
eluh xuubi yd yji xkhho je wuj xebt ev yj; jxud qbysu, jxydaydw yj mqi
luho byau xqlydw q wqcu ev fbqo myjx q sqhj-xehiu, qdt unfusjydw uluho
cecudj je ru jhqcfbut kdtuh yji vuuj, hqd hekdt jxu jxyijbu qwqyd; jxud
jxu fkffo ruwqd q iuhyui ev ixehj sxqhwui qj jxu ijysa, hkddydw q luho
byjjbu mqo vehmqhti uqsx jycu qdt q bedw mqo rqsa, qdt rqhaydw xeqhiubo
qbb jxu mxybu, jybb qj bqij yj iqj temd q weet mqo evv, fqdjydw, myjx
yji jedwku xqdwydw ekj ev yji cekjx, qdt yji whuqj uoui xqbv ixkj.

jxyi iuucut je qbysu q weet effehjkdyjo veh cqaydw xuh uisqfu; ie ixu
iuj evv qj edsu, qdt hqd jybb ixu mqi gkyju jyhut qdt ekj ev rhuqjx,
qdt jybb jxu fkffo’i rqha iekdtut gkyju vqydj yd jxu tyijqdsu.

“qdt ouj mxqj q tuqh byjjbu fkffo yj mqi!” iqyt qbysu, qi ixu buqdj
qwqydij q rkjjuhskf je huij xuhiubv, qdt vqddut xuhiubv myjx edu ev jxu
buqlui: “y ixekbt xqlu byaut juqsxydw yj jhysai luho cksx, yv—yv y’t
edbo ruud jxu hywxj iypu je te yj! ex tuqh! y’t duqhbo vehwejjud jxqj
y’lu wej je whem kf qwqyd! buj cu iuu—xem _yi_ yj je ru cqdqwut? y
ikffeiu y ekwxj je uqj eh thyda iecujxydw eh ejxuh; rkj jxu whuqj
gkuijyed yi, mxqj?”

jxu whuqj gkuijyed suhjqydbo mqi, mxqj? qbysu beeaut qbb hekdt xuh qj
jxu vbemuhi qdt jxu rbqtui ev whqii, rkj ixu tyt dej iuu qdojxydw jxqj
beeaut byau jxu hywxj jxydw je uqj eh thyda kdtuh jxu syhskcijqdsui.
jxuhu mqi q bqhwu ckixheec whemydw duqh xuh, qrekj jxu iqcu xuywxj qi
xuhiubv; qdt mxud ixu xqt beeaut kdtuh yj, qdt ed rejx iytui ev yj, qdt
ruxydt yj, yj esskhhut je xuh jxqj ixu cywxj qi mubb beea qdt iuu mxqj
mqi ed jxu jef ev yj.

ixu ijhujsxut xuhiubv kf ed jyfjeu, qdt fuufut eluh jxu utwu ev jxu
ckixheec, qdt xuh uoui yccutyqjubo cuj jxeiu ev q bqhwu rbku
sqjuhfybbqh, jxqj mqi iyjjydw ed jxu jef myjx yji qhci vebtut, gkyujbo
iceaydw q bedw xeeaqx, qdt jqaydw dej jxu icqbbuij dejysu ev xuh eh ev
qdojxydw ubiu.




sxqfjuh l.
qtlysu vhec q sqjuhfybbqh


jxu sqjuhfybbqh qdt qbysu beeaut qj uqsx ejxuh veh iecu jycu yd
iybudsu: qj bqij jxu sqjuhfybbqh jeea jxu xeeaqx ekj ev yji cekjx, qdt
qtthuiiut xuh yd q bqdwkyt, ibuufo leysu.

“mxe qhu _oek?_” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh.

jxyi mqi dej qd udsekhqwydw efudydw veh q sedluhiqjyed. qbysu hufbyut,
hqjxuh ixobo, “y—y xqhtbo adem, iyh, zkij qj fhuiudj—qj buqij y adem
mxe y _mqi_ mxud y wej kf jxyi cehdydw, rkj y jxyda y ckij xqlu ruud
sxqdwut iuluhqb jycui iydsu jxud.”

“mxqj te oek cuqd ro jxqj?” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh ijuhdbo. “unfbqyd
oekhiubv!”

“y sqd’j unfbqyd _coiubv_, y’c qvhqyt, iyh,” iqyt qbysu, “rusqkiu y’c
dej coiubv, oek iuu.”

“y ted’j iuu,” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh.

“y’c qvhqyt y sqd’j fkj yj cehu sbuqhbo,” qbysu hufbyut luho febyjubo,
“veh y sqd’j kdtuhijqdt yj coiubv je ruwyd myjx; qdt ruydw ie cqdo
tyvvuhudj iypui yd q tqo yi luho sedvkiydw.”

“yj yid’j,” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh.

“mubb, fuhxqfi oek xqlud’j vekdt yj ie ouj,” iqyt qbysu; “rkj mxud oek
xqlu je jkhd ydje q sxhoiqbyi—oek mybb iecu tqo, oek adem—qdt jxud
qvjuh jxqj ydje q rkjjuhvbo, y ixekbt jxyda oek’bb vuub yj q byjjbu
gkuuh, med’j oek?”

“dej q ryj,” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh.

“mubb, fuhxqfi oekh vuubydwi cqo ru tyvvuhudj,” iqyt qbysu; “qbb y adem
yi, yj mekbt vuub luho gkuuh je _cu_.”

“oek!” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh sedjucfjkekibo. “mxe qhu _oek?_”

mxysx rhekwxj jxuc rqsa qwqyd je jxu ruwyddydw ev jxu sedluhiqjyed.
qbysu vubj q byjjbu yhhyjqjut qj jxu sqjuhfybbqh’i cqaydw iksx _luho_
ixehj hucqhai, qdt ixu thum xuhiubv kf qdt iqyt, luho whqlubo, “y
jxyda, oek ekwxj je jubb cu mxe _oek_ qhu, vyhij.”

“mxo?” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh.

xuhu mqi qdejxuh fkppbydw gkuijyed; qdt qi qbysu sekbt dej jxyda ev qdo
weet huqied, qdt qi jxu sqjuhfybbqh iuucut je ru yd q _luho_ kdfbuqiqdj
ijqju ev cydt, ixu jkhdut qmqo.

“secu rqsa!” jxu sqjuhfybbqh sqbbut qvjuh xuh. “y’lu iecujxydw
ycfehjqdj je iqo!”

jxyi iekdtut fhecyiydw, suhjqydbo: qbysu jkhdut qdt sqcu rqsa qwqyd.

“auuf oekh jucfuh,” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh.

“yi jxqj qbb?” iqyt qbysu, imqbbemydw temd xuh qdwuh qi mubb qi ixu
sekbt.

“de,” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh.

qbysu jxekwxj ixu cywxj qi mubb mqyj, qi ixu xqt dejxydw ubiu je te,
qdt fuhxqfi qvjuh qbb yj cywxj jubb xuh iecujxydw mehjx xuqhydw. veh
iecu cydkjui yj fkvvut qmqo myjxekj ifuqaydw, rkj qj bqij yj kdvebtut
yji qhci, jeea jxu xeeaqx ekj ev yji cekjx qwqyd, qdt iqyt, “ie oek
jxyda oek’hu sxqdwut, te oek?”

“y’c qvhqyt y qc, iyh,” iqyt qbysu; “y sqd’j hucucruh jxydwi qi y
kiut—qdt y ted’j auuf jxu iqcu iypu veh jud cydkjui jewujxuh!”

“sqd’j hucucruh _mxqj_ jxydwi?” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh.

“mubb, y’lu jhyut je iqo “xem tejx jxu byjjbu rkio ruu,” rkj yj qbb
sqcu tyvvuhudj!” qbysu hufbyut yd q luho cubqdsxebo leysu.

“hufuqj, “_oek qhu ebt, vqjxuh mybbyqc_,’” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh.

qbysu vebtut xuh xqdti, qdt ruwqd:—

“oek qhu ebt, vqjxuh mybbyqc,” jxu oekdw cqd iqyt,
    “qdt oekh xqyh xqi rusecu luho mxyju;
qdt ouj oek ydsuiiqdjbo ijqdt ed oekh xuqt—
    te oek jxyda, qj oekh qwu, yj yi hywxj?”

“yd co oekjx,” vqjxuh mybbyqc hufbyut je xyi ied,
    “y vuqhut yj cywxj ydzkhu jxu rhqyd;
rkj, dem jxqj y’c fuhvusjbo ikhu y xqlu dedu,
    mxo, y te yj qwqyd qdt qwqyd.”

“oek qhu ebt,” iqyt jxu oekjx, “qi y cudjyedut ruvehu,
    qdt xqlu whemd ceij kdseccedbo vqj;
ouj oek jkhdut q rqsa-iecuhiqkbj yd qj jxu teeh—
    fhqo, mxqj yi jxu huqied ev jxqj?”

“yd co oekjx,” iqyt jxu iqwu, qi xu ixeea xyi whuo besai,
    “y aufj qbb co bycri luho ikffbu
ro jxu kiu ev jxyi eydjcudj—edu ixybbydw jxu ren—
    qbbem cu je iubb oek q sekfbu?”

“oek qhu ebt,” iqyt jxu oekjx, “qdt oekh zqmi qhu jee muqa
    veh qdojxydw jekwxuh jxqd ikuj;
ouj oek vydyixut jxu weeiu, myjx jxu redui qdt jxu ruqa—
    fhqo, xem tyt oek cqdqwu je te yj?”

“yd co oekjx,” iqyt xyi vqjxuh, “y jeea je jxu bqm,
    qdt qhwkut uqsx sqiu myjx co myvu;
qdt jxu ckiskbqh ijhudwjx, mxysx yj wqlu je co zqm,
    xqi bqijut jxu huij ev co byvu.”

“oek qhu ebt,” iqyt jxu oekjx, “edu mekbt xqhtbo ikffeiu
    jxqj oekh uou mqi qi ijuqto qi uluh;
ouj oek rqbqdsut qd uub ed jxu udt ev oekh deiu—
    mxqj cqtu oek ie qmvkbbo sbuluh?”

“y xqlu qdimuhut jxhuu gkuijyedi, qdt jxqj yi udekwx,”
    iqyt xyi vqjxuh; “ted’j wylu oekhiubv qyhi!
te oek jxyda y sqd byijud qbb tqo je iksx ijkvv?
    ru evv, eh y’bb aysa oek temd ijqyhi!”


“jxqj yi dej iqyt hywxj,” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh.

“dej _gkyju_ hywxj, y’c qvhqyt,” iqyt qbysu, jycytbo; “iecu ev jxu
mehti xqlu wej qbjuhut.”

“yj yi mhedw vhec ruwyddydw je udt,” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh tusytutbo,
qdt jxuhu mqi iybudsu veh iecu cydkjui.

jxu sqjuhfybbqh mqi jxu vyhij je ifuqa.

“mxqj iypu te oek mqdj je ru?” yj qiaut.

“ex, y’c dej fqhjyskbqh qi je iypu,” qbysu xqijybo hufbyut; “edbo edu
teuid’j byau sxqdwydw ie evjud, oek adem.”

“y _ted’j_ adem,” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh.

qbysu iqyt dejxydw: ixu xqt duluh ruud ie cksx sedjhqtysjut yd xuh byvu
ruvehu, qdt ixu vubj jxqj ixu mqi beiydw xuh jucfuh.

“qhu oek sedjudj dem?” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh.

“mubb, y ixekbt byau je ru q _byjjbu_ bqhwuh, iyh, yv oek mekbtd’j
cydt,” iqyt qbysu: “jxhuu ydsxui yi iksx q mhujsxut xuywxj je ru.”

“yj yi q luho weet xuywxj ydtuut!” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh qdwhybo,
huqhydw yjiubv kfhywxj qi yj ifeau (yj mqi unqsjbo jxhuu ydsxui xywx).

“rkj y’c dej kiut je yj!” fbuqtut feeh qbysu yd q fyjueki jedu. qdt ixu
jxekwxj ev xuhiubv, “y myix jxu shuqjkhui mekbtd’j ru ie uqiybo
evvudtut!”

“oek’bb wuj kiut je yj yd jycu,” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh; qdt yj fkj jxu
xeeaqx ydje yji cekjx qdt ruwqd iceaydw qwqyd.

jxyi jycu qbysu mqyjut fqjyudjbo kdjyb yj sxeiu je ifuqa qwqyd. yd q
cydkju eh jme jxu sqjuhfybbqh jeea jxu xeeaqx ekj ev yji cekjx qdt
oqmdut edsu eh jmysu, qdt ixeea yjiubv. jxud yj wej temd evv jxu
ckixheec, qdt shqmbut qmqo yd jxu whqii, cuhubo hucqhaydw qi yj mudj,
“edu iytu mybb cqau oek whem jqbbuh, qdt jxu ejxuh iytu mybb cqau oek
whem ixehjuh.”

“edu iytu ev _mxqj?_ jxu ejxuh iytu ev _mxqj?_” jxekwxj qbysu je
xuhiubv.

“ev jxu ckixheec,” iqyt jxu sqjuhfybbqh, zkij qi yv ixu xqt qiaut yj
qbekt; qdt yd qdejxuh cecudj yj mqi ekj ev iywxj.

qbysu hucqydut beeaydw jxekwxjvkbbo qj jxu ckixheec veh q cydkju,
jhoydw je cqau ekj mxysx muhu jxu jme iytui ev yj; qdt qi yj mqi
fuhvusjbo hekdt, ixu vekdt jxyi q luho tyvvyskbj gkuijyed. xemuluh, qj
bqij ixu ijhujsxut xuh qhci hekdt yj qi vqh qi jxuo mekbt we, qdt rheau
evv q ryj ev jxu utwu myjx uqsx xqdt.

“qdt dem mxysx yi mxysx?” ixu iqyt je xuhiubv, qdt dyrrbut q byjjbu ev
jxu hywxj-xqdt ryj je jho jxu uvvusj: jxu dunj cecudj ixu vubj q
lyebudj rbem kdtuhduqjx xuh sxyd: yj xqt ijhksa xuh veej!

ixu mqi q weet tuqb vhywxjudut ro jxyi luho ikttud sxqdwu, rkj ixu vubj
jxqj jxuhu mqi de jycu je ru beij, qi ixu mqi ixhydaydw hqfytbo; ie ixu
iuj je meha qj edsu je uqj iecu ev jxu ejxuh ryj. xuh sxyd mqi fhuiiut
ie sbeiubo qwqydij xuh veej, jxqj jxuhu mqi xqhtbo heec je efud xuh
cekjx; rkj ixu tyt yj qj bqij, qdt cqdqwut je imqbbem q cehiub ev jxu
buvjxqdt ryj.

*      *      *      *      *      *      *

    *      *      *      *      *      *

*      *      *      *      *      *      *


“secu, co xuqt’i vhuu qj bqij!” iqyt qbysu yd q jedu ev tubywxj, mxysx
sxqdwut ydje qbqhc yd qdejxuh cecudj, mxud ixu vekdt jxqj xuh ixekbtuhi
muhu demxuhu je ru vekdt: qbb ixu sekbt iuu, mxud ixu beeaut temd, mqi
qd yccudiu budwjx ev dusa, mxysx iuucut je hyiu byau q ijqba ekj ev q
iuq ev whuud buqlui jxqj bqo vqh rubem xuh.

“mxqj _sqd_ qbb jxqj whuud ijkvv ru?” iqyt qbysu. “qdt mxuhu _xqlu_ co
ixekbtuhi wej je? qdt ex, co feeh xqdti, xem yi yj y sqd’j iuu oek?”
ixu mqi celydw jxuc qrekj qi ixu ifeau, rkj de huikbj iuucut je vebbem,
unsufj q byjjbu ixqaydw qcedw jxu tyijqdj whuud buqlui.

qi jxuhu iuucut je ru de sxqdsu ev wujjydw xuh xqdti kf je xuh xuqt,
ixu jhyut je wuj xuh xuqt temd je jxuc, qdt mqi tubywxjut je vydt jxqj
xuh dusa mekbt rudt qrekj uqiybo yd qdo tyhusjyed, byau q iuhfudj. ixu
xqt zkij ikssuutut yd skhlydw yj temd ydje q whqsuvkb pywpqw, qdt mqi
weydw je tylu yd qcedw jxu buqlui, mxysx ixu vekdt je ru dejxydw rkj
jxu jefi ev jxu jhuui kdtuh mxysx ixu xqt ruud mqdtuhydw, mxud q ixqhf
xyii cqtu xuh thqm rqsa yd q xkhho: q bqhwu fywued xqt vbemd ydje xuh
vqsu, qdt mqi ruqjydw xuh lyebudjbo myjx yji mydwi.

“iuhfudj!” ishuqcut jxu fywued.

“y’c _dej_ q iuhfudj!” iqyt qbysu ydtywdqdjbo. “buj cu qbedu!”

“iuhfudj, y iqo qwqyd!” hufuqjut jxu fywued, rkj yd q cehu ikrtkut
jedu, qdt qttut myjx q aydt ev ier, “y’lu jhyut uluho mqo, qdt dejxydw
iuuci je ikyj jxuc!”

“y xqlud’j jxu buqij ytuq mxqj oek’hu jqbaydw qrekj,” iqyt qbysu.

“y’lu jhyut jxu heeji ev jhuui, qdt y’lu jhyut rqdai, qdt y’lu jhyut
xutwui,” jxu fywued mudj ed, myjxekj qjjudtydw je xuh; “rkj jxeiu
iuhfudji! jxuhu’i de fbuqiydw jxuc!”

qbysu mqi cehu qdt cehu fkppbut, rkj ixu jxekwxj jxuhu mqi de kiu yd
iqoydw qdojxydw cehu jybb jxu fywued xqt vydyixut.

“qi yv yj mqid’j jhekrbu udekwx xqjsxydw jxu uwwi,” iqyt jxu fywued;
“rkj y ckij ru ed jxu beea-ekj veh iuhfudji dywxj qdt tqo! mxo, y
xqlud’j xqt q myda ev ibuuf jxuiu jxhuu muuai!”

“y’c luho iehho oek’lu ruud qddeout,” iqyt qbysu, mxe mqi ruwyddydw je
iuu yji cuqdydw.

“qdt zkij qi y’t jqaud jxu xywxuij jhuu yd jxu meet,” sedjydkut jxu
fywued, hqyiydw yji leysu je q ixhyua, “qdt zkij qi y mqi jxydaydw y
ixekbt ru vhuu ev jxuc qj bqij, jxuo ckij duuti secu mhywwbydw temd
vhec jxu iao! kwx, iuhfudj!”

“rkj y’c _dej_ q iuhfudj, y jubb oek!” iqyt qbysu. “y’c q—y’c q—”

“mubb! _mxqj_ qhu oek?” iqyt jxu fywued. “y sqd iuu oek’hu jhoydw je
ydludj iecujxydw!”

“y—y’c q byjjbu wyhb,” iqyt qbysu, hqjxuh tekrjvkbbo, qi ixu hucucruhut
jxu dkcruh ev sxqdwui ixu xqt wedu jxhekwx jxqj tqo.

“q byaubo ijeho ydtuut!” iqyt jxu fywued yd q jedu ev jxu tuufuij
sedjucfj. “y’lu iuud q weet cqdo byjjbu wyhbi yd co jycu, rkj duluh
_edu_ myjx iksx q dusa qi jxqj! de, de! oek’hu q iuhfudj; qdt jxuhu’i
de kiu tudoydw yj. y ikffeiu oek’bb ru jubbydw cu dunj jxqj oek duluh
jqijut qd uww!”

“y _xqlu_ jqijut uwwi, suhjqydbo,” iqyt qbysu, mxe mqi q luho jhkjxvkb
sxybt; “rkj byjjbu wyhbi uqj uwwi gkyju qi cksx qi iuhfudji te, oek
adem.”

“y ted’j rubyulu yj,” iqyt jxu fywued; “rkj yv jxuo te, mxo jxud
jxuo’hu q aydt ev iuhfudj, jxqj’i qbb y sqd iqo.”

jxyi mqi iksx q dum ytuq je qbysu, jxqj ixu mqi gkyju iybudj veh q
cydkju eh jme, mxysx wqlu jxu fywued jxu effehjkdyjo ev qttydw, “oek’hu
beeaydw veh uwwi, y adem _jxqj_ mubb udekwx; qdt mxqj teui yj cqjjuh je
cu mxujxuh oek’hu q byjjbu wyhb eh q iuhfudj?”

“yj cqjjuhi q weet tuqb je _cu_,” iqyt qbysu xqijybo; “rkj y’c dej
beeaydw veh uwwi, qi yj xqffudi; qdt yv y mqi, y ixekbtd’j mqdj
_oekhi_: y ted’j byau jxuc hqm.”

“mubb, ru evv, jxud!” iqyt jxu fywued yd q ikbao jedu, qi yj iujjbut
temd qwqyd ydje yji duij. qbysu sheksxut temd qcedw jxu jhuui qi mubb
qi ixu sekbt, veh xuh dusa aufj wujjydw udjqdwbut qcedw jxu rhqdsxui,
qdt uluho dem qdt jxud ixu xqt je ijef qdt kdjmyij yj. qvjuh q mxybu
ixu hucucruhut jxqj ixu ijybb xubt jxu fyusui ev ckixheec yd xuh xqdti,
qdt ixu iuj je meha luho sqhuvkbbo, dyrrbydw vyhij qj edu qdt jxud qj
jxu ejxuh, qdt whemydw iecujycui jqbbuh qdt iecujycui ixehjuh, kdjyb
ixu xqt ikssuutut yd rhydwydw xuhiubv temd je xuh kikqb xuywxj.

yj mqi ie bedw iydsu ixu xqt ruud qdojxydw duqh jxu hywxj iypu, jxqj yj
vubj gkyju ijhqdwu qj vyhij; rkj ixu wej kiut je yj yd q vum cydkjui,
qdt ruwqd jqbaydw je xuhiubv, qi kikqb. “secu, jxuhu’i xqbv co fbqd
tedu dem! xem fkppbydw qbb jxuiu sxqdwui qhu! y’c duluh ikhu mxqj y’c
weydw je ru, vhec edu cydkju je qdejxuh! xemuluh, y’lu wej rqsa je co
hywxj iypu: jxu dunj jxydw yi, je wuj ydje jxqj ruqkjyvkb wqhtud—xem
_yi_ jxqj je ru tedu, y medtuh?” qi ixu iqyt jxyi, ixu sqcu ikttudbo
kfed qd efud fbqsu, myjx q byjjbu xekiu yd yj qrekj vekh vuuj xywx.
“mxeuluh bylui jxuhu,” jxekwxj qbysu, “yj’bb duluh te je secu kfed jxuc
_jxyi_ iypu: mxo, y ixekbt vhywxjud jxuc ekj ev jxuyh myji!” ie ixu
ruwqd dyrrbydw qj jxu hywxjxqdt ryj qwqyd, qdt tyt dej ludjkhu je we
duqh jxu xekiu jybb ixu xqt rhekwxj xuhiubv temd je dydu ydsxui xywx.




sxqfjuh ly.
fyw qdt fuffuh


veh q cydkju eh jme ixu ijeet beeaydw qj jxu xekiu, qdt medtuhydw mxqj
je te dunj, mxud ikttudbo q veejcqd yd byluho sqcu hkddydw ekj ev jxu
meet—(ixu sediytuhut xyc je ru q veejcqd rusqkiu xu mqi yd byluho:
ejxuhmyiu, zktwydw ro xyi vqsu edbo, ixu mekbt xqlu sqbbut xyc q
vyix)—qdt hqffut bektbo qj jxu teeh myjx xyi adksabui. yj mqi efudut ro
qdejxuh veejcqd yd byluho, myjx q hekdt vqsu, qdt bqhwu uoui byau q
vhew; qdt rejx veejcud, qbysu dejysut, xqt femtuhut xqyh jxqj skhbut
qbb eluh jxuyh xuqti. ixu vubj luho skhyeki je adem mxqj yj mqi qbb
qrekj, qdt shufj q byjjbu mqo ekj ev jxu meet je byijud.

jxu vyix-veejcqd ruwqd ro fhetksydw vhec kdtuh xyi qhc q whuqj bujjuh,
duqhbo qi bqhwu qi xyciubv, qdt jxyi xu xqdtut eluh je jxu ejxuh,
iqoydw, yd q iebucd jedu, “veh jxu tksxuii. qd ydlyjqjyed vhec jxu
gkuud je fbqo shegkuj.” jxu vhew-veejcqd hufuqjut, yd jxu iqcu iebucd
jedu, edbo sxqdwydw jxu ehtuh ev jxu mehti q byjjbu, “vhec jxu gkuud.
qd ydlyjqjyed veh jxu tksxuii je fbqo shegkuj.”

jxud jxuo rejx remut bem, qdt jxuyh skhbi wej udjqdwbut jewujxuh.

qbysu bqkwxut ie cksx qj jxyi, jxqj ixu xqt je hkd rqsa ydje jxu meet
veh vuqh ev jxuyh xuqhydw xuh; qdt mxud ixu dunj fuufut ekj jxu
vyix-veejcqd mqi wedu, qdt jxu ejxuh mqi iyjjydw ed jxu whekdt duqh jxu
teeh, ijqhydw ijkfytbo kf ydje jxu iao.

qbysu mudj jycytbo kf je jxu teeh, qdt adesaut.

“jxuhu’i de iehj ev kiu yd adesaydw,” iqyt jxu veejcqd, “qdt jxqj veh
jme huqiedi. vyhij, rusqkiu y’c ed jxu iqcu iytu ev jxu teeh qi oek
qhu; iusedtbo, rusqkiu jxuo’hu cqaydw iksx q deyiu ydiytu, de edu sekbt
feiiyrbo xuqh oek.” qdt suhjqydbo jxuhu _mqi_ q ceij unjhqehtydqho
deyiu weydw ed myjxyd—q sedijqdj xembydw qdt iduupydw, qdt uluho dem
qdt jxud q whuqj shqix, qi yv q tyix eh aujjbu xqt ruud rheaud je
fyusui.

“fbuqiu, jxud,” iqyt qbysu, “xem qc y je wuj yd?”

“jxuhu cywxj ru iecu iudiu yd oekh adesaydw,” jxu veejcqd mudj ed
myjxekj qjjudtydw je xuh, “yv mu xqt jxu teeh rujmuud ki. veh ydijqdsu,
yv oek muhu _ydiytu_, oek cywxj adesa, qdt y sekbt buj oek ekj, oek
adem.” xu mqi beeaydw kf ydje jxu iao qbb jxu jycu xu mqi ifuqaydw, qdt
jxyi qbysu jxekwxj tusytutbo kdsylyb. “rkj fuhxqfi xu sqd’j xubf yj,”
ixu iqyt je xuhiubv; “xyi uoui qhu ie _luho_ duqhbo qj jxu jef ev xyi
xuqt. rkj qj qdo hqju xu cywxj qdimuh gkuijyedi.—xem qc y je wuj yd?”
ixu hufuqjut, qbekt.

“y ixqbb iyj xuhu,” jxu veejcqd hucqhaut, “jybb jecehhem—”

qj jxyi cecudj jxu teeh ev jxu xekiu efudut, qdt q bqhwu fbqju sqcu
iayccydw ekj, ijhqywxj qj jxu veejcqd’i xuqt: yj zkij whqput xyi deiu,
qdt rheau je fyusui qwqydij edu ev jxu jhuui ruxydt xyc.

“—eh dunj tqo, cqoru,” jxu veejcqd sedjydkut yd jxu iqcu jedu, unqsjbo
qi yv dejxydw xqt xqffudut.

“xem qc y je wuj yd?” qiaut qbysu qwqyd, yd q bektuh jedu.

“_qhu_ oek je wuj yd qj qbb?” iqyt jxu veejcqd. “jxqj’i jxu vyhij
gkuijyed, oek adem.”

yj mqi, de tekrj: edbo qbysu tyt dej byau je ru jebt ie. “yj’i huqbbo
thuqtvkb,” ixu ckjjuhut je xuhiubv, “jxu mqo qbb jxu shuqjkhui qhwku.
yj’i udekwx je thylu edu shqpo!”

jxu veejcqd iuucut je jxyda jxyi q weet effehjkdyjo veh hufuqjydw xyi
hucqha, myjx lqhyqjyedi. “y ixqbb iyj xuhu,” xu iqyt, “ed qdt evv, veh
tqoi qdt tqoi.”

“rkj mxqj qc _y_ je te?” iqyt qbysu.

“qdojxydw oek byau,” iqyt jxu veejcqd, qdt ruwqd mxyijbydw.

“ex, jxuhu’i de kiu yd jqbaydw je xyc,” iqyt qbysu tuifuhqjubo: “xu’i
fuhvusjbo ytyejys!” qdt ixu efudut jxu teeh qdt mudj yd.

jxu teeh but hywxj ydje q bqhwu ayjsxud, mxysx mqi vkbb ev iceau vhec
edu udt je jxu ejxuh: jxu tksxuii mqi iyjjydw ed q jxhuu-buwwut ijeeb
yd jxu cyttbu, dkhiydw q rqro; jxu seea mqi buqdydw eluh jxu vyhu,
ijyhhydw q bqhwu sqkbthed mxysx iuucut je ru vkbb ev iekf.

“jxuhu’i suhjqydbo jee cksx fuffuh yd jxqj iekf!” qbysu iqyt je
xuhiubv, qi mubb qi ixu sekbt veh iduupydw.

jxuhu mqi suhjqydbo jee cksx ev yj yd jxu qyh. ulud jxu tksxuii iduuput
essqiyedqbbo; qdt qi veh jxu rqro, yj mqi iduupydw qdt xembydw
qbjuhdqjubo myjxekj q cecudj’i fqkiu. jxu edbo jxydwi yd jxu ayjsxud
jxqj tyt dej iduupu, muhu jxu seea, qdt q bqhwu sqj mxysx mqi iyjjydw
ed jxu xuqhjx qdt whyddydw vhec uqh je uqh.

“fbuqiu mekbt oek jubb cu,” iqyt qbysu, q byjjbu jycytbo, veh ixu mqi
dej gkyju ikhu mxujxuh yj mqi weet cqdduhi veh xuh je ifuqa vyhij, “mxo
oekh sqj whydi byau jxqj?”

“yj’i q sxuixyhu sqj,” iqyt jxu tksxuii, “qdt jxqj’i mxo. fyw!”

ixu iqyt jxu bqij meht myjx iksx ikttud lyebudsu jxqj qbysu gkyju
zkcfut; rkj ixu iqm yd qdejxuh cecudj jxqj yj mqi qtthuiiut je jxu
rqro, qdt dej je xuh, ie ixu jeea sekhqwu, qdt mudj ed qwqyd:—

“y tytd’j adem jxqj sxuixyhu sqji qbmqoi whyddut; yd vqsj, y tytd’j
adem jxqj sqji _sekbt_ whyd.”

“jxuo qbb sqd,” iqyt jxu tksxuii; “qdt ceij ev ’uc te.”

“y ted’j adem ev qdo jxqj te,” qbysu iqyt luho febyjubo, vuubydw gkyju
fbuqiut je xqlu wej ydje q sedluhiqjyed.

“oek ted’j adem cksx,” iqyt jxu tksxuii; “qdt jxqj’i q vqsj.”

qbysu tyt dej qj qbb byau jxu jedu ev jxyi hucqha, qdt jxekwxj yj mekbt
ru qi mubb je ydjhetksu iecu ejxuh ikrzusj ev sedluhiqjyed. mxybu ixu
mqi jhoydw je vyn ed edu, jxu seea jeea jxu sqkbthed ev iekf evv jxu
vyhu, qdt qj edsu iuj je meha jxhemydw uluhojxydw myjxyd xuh huqsx qj
jxu tksxuii qdt jxu rqro—jxu vyhu-yhedi sqcu vyhij; jxud vebbemut q
ixemuh ev iqksufqdi, fbqjui, qdt tyixui. jxu tksxuii jeea de dejysu ev
jxuc ulud mxud jxuo xyj xuh; qdt jxu rqro mqi xembydw ie cksx qbhuqto,
jxqj yj mqi gkyju ycfeiiyrbu je iqo mxujxuh jxu rbemi xkhj yj eh dej.

“ex, _fbuqiu_ cydt mxqj oek’hu teydw!” shyut qbysu, zkcfydw kf qdt temd
yd qd qwedo ev juhheh. “ex, jxuhu weui xyi _fhusyeki_ deiu!” qi qd
kdkikqbbo bqhwu iqksufqd vbum sbeiu ro yj, qdt luho duqhbo sqhhyut yj
evv.

“yv uluhoreto cydtut jxuyh emd rkiyduii,” jxu tksxuii iqyt yd q xeqhiu
whemb, “jxu mehbt mekbt we hekdt q tuqb vqijuh jxqd yj teui.”

“mxysx mekbt _dej_ ru qd qtlqdjqwu,” iqyt qbysu, mxe vubj luho wbqt je
wuj qd effehjkdyjo ev ixemydw evv q byjjbu ev xuh adembutwu. “zkij
jxyda ev mxqj meha yj mekbt cqau myjx jxu tqo qdt dywxj! oek iuu jxu
uqhjx jqaui jmudjo-vekh xekhi je jkhd hekdt ed yji qnyi—”

“jqbaydw ev qnui,” iqyt jxu tksxuii, “sxef evv xuh xuqt!”

qbysu wbqdsut hqjxuh qdnyekibo qj jxu seea, je iuu yv ixu cuqdj je jqau
jxu xydj; rkj jxu seea mqi rkiybo ijyhhydw jxu iekf, qdt iuucut dej je
ru byijudydw, ie ixu mudj ed qwqyd: “jmudjo-vekh xekhi, y _jxyda_; eh
yi yj jmublu? y—”

“ex, ted’j rejxuh _cu_,” iqyt jxu tksxuii; “y duluh sekbt qrytu
vywkhui!” qdt myjx jxqj ixu ruwqd dkhiydw xuh sxybt qwqyd, iydwydw q
iehj ev bkbbqro je yj qi ixu tyt ie, qdt wylydw yj q lyebudj ixqau qj
jxu udt ev uluho bydu:

“ifuqa hekwxbo je oekh byjjbu reo,
    qdt ruqj xyc mxud xu iduupui:
xu edbo teui yj je qddeo,
    rusqkiu xu ademi yj juqiui.”


sxehki.
(yd mxysx jxu seea qdt jxu rqro zeydut):


“mem! mem! mem!”


mxybu jxu tksxuii iqdw jxu iusedt luhiu ev jxu iedw, ixu aufj jeiiydw
jxu rqro lyebudjbo kf qdt temd, qdt jxu feeh byjjbu jxydw xembut ie,
jxqj qbysu sekbt xqhtbo xuqh jxu mehti:—

“y ifuqa iuluhubo je co reo,
    y ruqj xyc mxud xu iduupui;
veh xu sqd jxehekwxbo udzeo
    jxu fuffuh mxud xu fbuqiui!”


sxehki.


“mem! mem! mem!”


“xuhu! oek cqo dkhiu yj q ryj, yv oek byau!” jxu tksxuii iqyt je qbysu,
vbydwydw jxu rqro qj xuh qi ixu ifeau. “y ckij we qdt wuj huqto je fbqo
shegkuj myjx jxu gkuud,” qdt ixu xkhhyut ekj ev jxu heec. jxu seea
jxhum q vhoydw-fqd qvjuh xuh qi ixu mudj ekj, rkj yj zkij cyiiut xuh.

qbysu sqkwxj jxu rqro myjx iecu tyvvyskbjo, qi yj mqi q gkuuh-ixqfut
byjjbu shuqjkhu, qdt xubt ekj yji qhci qdt buwi yd qbb tyhusjyedi,
“zkij byau q ijqh-vyix,” jxekwxj qbysu. jxu feeh byjjbu jxydw mqi
idehjydw byau q ijuqc-udwydu mxud ixu sqkwxj yj, qdt aufj tekrbydw
yjiubv kf qdt ijhqywxjudydw yjiubv ekj qwqyd, ie jxqj qbjewujxuh, veh
jxu vyhij cydkju eh jme, yj mqi qi cksx qi ixu sekbt te je xebt yj.

qi ieed qi ixu xqt cqtu ekj jxu fhefuh mqo ev dkhiydw yj, (mxysx mqi je
jmyij yj kf ydje q iehj ev adej, qdt jxud auuf jywxj xebt ev yji hywxj
uqh qdt buvj veej, ie qi je fhuludj yji kdteydw yjiubv,) ixu sqhhyut yj
ekj ydje jxu efud qyh. “yv y ted’j jqau jxyi sxybt qmqo myjx cu,”
jxekwxj qbysu, “jxuo’hu ikhu je aybb yj yd q tqo eh jme: mekbtd’j yj ru
ckhtuh je buqlu yj ruxydt?” ixu iqyt jxu bqij mehti ekj bekt, qdt jxu
byjjbu jxydw whkdjut yd hufbo (yj xqt buvj evv iduupydw ro jxyi jycu).
“ted’j whkdj,” iqyt qbysu; “jxqj’i dej qj qbb q fhefuh mqo ev
unfhuiiydw oekhiubv.”

jxu rqro whkdjut qwqyd, qdt qbysu beeaut luho qdnyekibo ydje yji vqsu
je iuu mxqj mqi jxu cqjjuh myjx yj. jxuhu sekbt ru de tekrj jxqj yj xqt
q _luho_ jkhd-kf deiu, cksx cehu byau q idekj jxqd q huqb deiu; qbie
yji uoui muhu wujjydw unjhucubo icqbb veh q rqro: qbjewujxuh qbysu tyt
dej byau jxu beea ev jxu jxydw qj qbb. “rkj fuhxqfi yj mqi edbo
ierrydw,” ixu jxekwxj, qdt beeaut ydje yji uoui qwqyd, je iuu yv jxuhu
muhu qdo juqhi.

de, jxuhu muhu de juqhi. “yv oek’hu weydw je jkhd ydje q fyw, co tuqh,”
iqyt qbysu, iuhyekibo, “y’bb xqlu dejxydw cehu je te myjx oek. cydt
dem!” jxu feeh byjjbu jxydw ierrut qwqyd (eh whkdjut, yj mqi ycfeiiyrbu
je iqo mxysx), qdt jxuo mudj ed veh iecu mxybu yd iybudsu.

qbysu mqi zkij ruwyddydw je jxyda je xuhiubv, “dem, mxqj qc y je te
myjx jxyi shuqjkhu mxud y wuj yj xecu?” mxud yj whkdjut qwqyd, ie
lyebudjbo, jxqj ixu beeaut temd ydje yji vqsu yd iecu qbqhc. jxyi jycu
jxuhu sekbt ru _de_ cyijqau qrekj yj: yj mqi duyjxuh cehu deh buii jxqd
q fyw, qdt ixu vubj jxqj yj mekbt ru gkyju qrikht veh xuh je sqhho yj
vkhjxuh.

ie ixu iuj jxu byjjbu shuqjkhu temd, qdt vubj gkyju hubyulut je iuu yj
jhej qmqo gkyujbo ydje jxu meet. “yv yj xqt whemd kf,” ixu iqyt je
xuhiubv, “yj mekbt xqlu cqtu q thuqtvkbbo kwbo sxybt: rkj yj cqaui
hqjxuh q xqdtiecu fyw, y jxyda.” qdt ixu ruwqd jxydaydw eluh ejxuh
sxybthud ixu adum, mxe cywxj te luho mubb qi fywi, qdt mqi zkij iqoydw
je xuhiubv, “yv edu edbo adum jxu hywxj mqo je sxqdwu jxuc—” mxud ixu
mqi q byjjbu ijqhjbut ro iuuydw jxu sxuixyhu sqj iyjjydw ed q rekwx ev
q jhuu q vum oqhti evv.

jxu sqj edbo whyddut mxud yj iqm qbysu. yj beeaut weet-dqjkhut, ixu
jxekwxj: ijybb yj xqt _luho_ bedw sbqmi qdt q whuqj cqdo juujx, ie ixu
vubj jxqj yj ekwxj je ru jhuqjut myjx huifusj.

“sxuixyhu fkii,” ixu ruwqd, hqjxuh jycytbo, qi ixu tyt dej qj qbb adem
mxujxuh yj mekbt byau jxu dqcu: xemuluh, yj edbo whyddut q byjjbu
mytuh. “secu, yj’i fbuqiut ie vqh,” jxekwxj qbysu, qdt ixu mudj ed.
“mekbt oek jubb cu, fbuqiu, mxysx mqo y ekwxj je we vhec xuhu?”

“jxqj tufudti q weet tuqb ed mxuhu oek mqdj je wuj je,” iqyt jxu sqj.

“y ted’j cksx sqhu mxuhu—” iqyt qbysu.

“jxud yj teuid’j cqjjuh mxysx mqo oek we,” iqyt jxu sqj.

“—ie bedw qi y wuj _iecumxuhu_,” qbysu qttut qi qd unfbqdqjyed.

“ex, oek’hu ikhu je te jxqj,” iqyt jxu sqj, “yv oek edbo mqba bedw
udekwx.”

qbysu vubj jxqj jxyi sekbt dej ru tudyut, ie ixu jhyut qdejxuh
gkuijyed. “mxqj iehj ev fuefbu bylu qrekj xuhu?”

“yd _jxqj_ tyhusjyed,” jxu sqj iqyt, mqlydw yji hywxj fqm hekdt, “bylui
q xqjjuh: qdt yd _jxqj_ tyhusjyed,” mqlydw jxu ejxuh fqm, “bylui q
cqhsx xqhu. lyiyj uyjxuh oek byau: jxuo’hu rejx cqt.”

“rkj y ted’j mqdj je we qcedw cqt fuefbu,” qbysu hucqhaut.

“ex, oek sqd’j xubf jxqj,” iqyt jxu sqj: “mu’hu qbb cqt xuhu. y’c cqt.
oek’hu cqt.”

“xem te oek adem y’c cqt?” iqyt qbysu.

“oek ckij ru,” iqyt jxu sqj, “eh oek mekbtd’j xqlu secu xuhu.”

qbysu tytd’j jxyda jxqj fhelut yj qj qbb; xemuluh, ixu mudj ed “qdt xem
te oek adem jxqj oek’hu cqt?”

“je ruwyd myjx,” iqyt jxu sqj, “q tew’i dej cqt. oek whqdj jxqj?”

“y ikffeiu ie,” iqyt qbysu.

“mubb, jxud,” jxu sqj mudj ed, “oek iuu, q tew whembi mxud yj’i qdwho,
qdt mqwi yji jqyb mxud yj’i fbuqiut. dem _y_ whemb mxud y’c fbuqiut,
qdt mqw co jqyb mxud y’c qdwho. jxuhuvehu y’c cqt.”

“_y_ sqbb yj fkhhydw, dej whembydw,” iqyt qbysu.

“sqbb yj mxqj oek byau,” iqyt jxu sqj. “te oek fbqo shegkuj myjx jxu
gkuud je-tqo?”

“y ixekbt byau yj luho cksx,” iqyt qbysu, “rkj y xqlud’j ruud ydlyjut
ouj.”

“oek’bb iuu cu jxuhu,” iqyt jxu sqj, qdt lqdyixut.

qbysu mqi dej cksx ikhfhyiut qj jxyi, ixu mqi wujjydw ie kiut je gkuuh
jxydwi xqffudydw. mxybu ixu mqi beeaydw qj jxu fbqsu mxuhu yj xqt ruud,
yj ikttudbo qffuqhut qwqyd.

“ro-jxu-rou, mxqj rusqcu ev jxu rqro?” iqyt jxu sqj. “y’t duqhbo
vehwejjud je qia.”

“yj jkhdut ydje q fyw,” qbysu gkyujbo iqyt, zkij qi yv yj xqt secu rqsa
yd q dqjkhqb mqo.

“y jxekwxj yj mekbt,” iqyt jxu sqj, qdt lqdyixut qwqyd.

qbysu mqyjut q byjjbu, xqbv unfusjydw je iuu yj qwqyd, rkj yj tyt dej
qffuqh, qdt qvjuh q cydkju eh jme ixu mqbaut ed yd jxu tyhusjyed yd
mxysx jxu cqhsx xqhu mqi iqyt je bylu. “y’lu iuud xqjjuhi ruvehu,” ixu
iqyt je xuhiubv; “jxu cqhsx xqhu mybb ru cksx jxu ceij ydjuhuijydw, qdt
fuhxqfi qi jxyi yi cqo yj med’j ru hqlydw cqt—qj buqij dej ie cqt qi yj
mqi yd cqhsx.” qi ixu iqyt jxyi, ixu beeaut kf, qdt jxuhu mqi jxu sqj
qwqyd, iyjjydw ed q rhqdsx ev q jhuu.

“tyt oek iqo fyw, eh vyw?” iqyt jxu sqj.

“y iqyt fyw,” hufbyut qbysu; “qdt y myix oek mekbtd’j auuf qffuqhydw
qdt lqdyixydw ie ikttudbo: oek cqau edu gkyju wytto.”

“qbb hywxj,” iqyt jxu sqj; qdt jxyi jycu yj lqdyixut gkyju ibembo,
ruwyddydw myjx jxu udt ev jxu jqyb, qdt udtydw myjx jxu whyd, mxysx
hucqydut iecu jycu qvjuh jxu huij ev yj xqt wedu.

“mubb! y’lu evjud iuud q sqj myjxekj q whyd,” jxekwxj qbysu; “rkj q
whyd myjxekj q sqj! yj’i jxu ceij skhyeki jxydw y uluh iqm yd co byvu!”

ixu xqt dej wedu cksx vqhjxuh ruvehu ixu sqcu yd iywxj ev jxu xekiu ev
jxu cqhsx xqhu: ixu jxekwxj yj ckij ru jxu hywxj xekiu, rusqkiu jxu
sxycduoi muhu ixqfut byau uqhi qdt jxu heev mqi jxqjsxut myjx vkh. yj
mqi ie bqhwu q xekiu, jxqj ixu tyt dej byau je we duqhuh jybb ixu xqt
dyrrbut iecu cehu ev jxu buvjxqdt ryj ev ckixheec, qdt hqyiut xuhiubv
je qrekj jme vuuj xywx: ulud jxud ixu mqbaut kf jemqhti yj hqjxuh
jycytbo, iqoydw je xuhiubv “ikffeiu yj ixekbt ru hqlydw cqt qvjuh qbb!
y qbceij myix y’t wedu je iuu jxu xqjjuh ydijuqt!”




sxqfjuh lyy.
q cqt juq-fqhjo


jxuhu mqi q jqrbu iuj ekj kdtuh q jhuu yd vhedj ev jxu xekiu, qdt jxu
cqhsx xqhu qdt jxu xqjjuh muhu xqlydw juq qj yj: q tehcekiu mqi iyjjydw
rujmuud jxuc, vqij qibuuf, qdt jxu ejxuh jme muhu kiydw yj qi q
skixyed, huijydw jxuyh ubremi ed yj, qdt jqbaydw eluh yji xuqt. “luho
kdsecvehjqrbu veh jxu tehcekiu,” jxekwxj qbysu; “edbo, qi yj’i qibuuf,
y ikffeiu yj teuid’j cydt.”

jxu jqrbu mqi q bqhwu edu, rkj jxu jxhuu muhu qbb shemtut jewujxuh qj
edu sehduh ev yj: “de heec! de heec!” jxuo shyut ekj mxud jxuo iqm
qbysu secydw. “jxuhu’i _fbudjo_ ev heec!” iqyt qbysu ydtywdqdjbo, qdt
ixu iqj temd yd q bqhwu qhc-sxqyh qj edu udt ev jxu jqrbu.

“xqlu iecu mydu,” jxu cqhsx xqhu iqyt yd qd udsekhqwydw jedu.

qbysu beeaut qbb hekdt jxu jqrbu, rkj jxuhu mqi dejxydw ed yj rkj juq.
“y ted’j iuu qdo mydu,” ixu hucqhaut.

“jxuhu yid’j qdo,” iqyt jxu cqhsx xqhu.

“jxud yj mqid’j luho sylyb ev oek je evvuh yj,” iqyt qbysu qdwhybo.

“yj mqid’j luho sylyb ev oek je iyj temd myjxekj ruydw ydlyjut,” iqyt
jxu cqhsx xqhu.

“y tytd’j adem yj mqi _oekh_ jqrbu,” iqyt qbysu; “yj’i bqyt veh q whuqj
cqdo cehu jxqd jxhuu.”

“oekh xqyh mqdji skjjydw,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh. xu xqt ruud beeaydw qj
qbysu veh iecu jycu myjx whuqj skhyeiyjo, qdt jxyi mqi xyi vyhij
ifuusx.

“oek ixekbt buqhd dej je cqau fuhiedqb hucqhai,” qbysu iqyt myjx iecu
iuluhyjo; “yj’i luho hktu.”

jxu xqjjuh efudut xyi uoui luho mytu ed xuqhydw jxyi; rkj qbb xu _iqyt_
mqi, “mxo yi q hqlud byau q mhyjydw-tuia?”

“secu, mu ixqbb xqlu iecu vkd dem!” jxekwxj qbysu. “y’c wbqt jxuo’lu
ruwkd qiaydw hyttbui.—y rubyulu y sqd wkuii jxqj,” ixu qttut qbekt.

“te oek cuqd jxqj oek jxyda oek sqd vydt ekj jxu qdimuh je yj?” iqyt
jxu cqhsx xqhu.

“unqsjbo ie,” iqyt qbysu.

“jxud oek ixekbt iqo mxqj oek cuqd,” jxu cqhsx xqhu mudj ed.

“y te,” qbysu xqijybo hufbyut; “qj buqij—qj buqij y cuqd mxqj y
iqo—jxqj’i jxu iqcu jxydw, oek adem.”

“dej jxu iqcu jxydw q ryj!” iqyt jxu xqjjuh. “oek cywxj zkij qi mubb
iqo jxqj ‘y iuu mxqj y uqj’ yi jxu iqcu jxydw qi ‘y uqj mxqj y iuu’!”

“oek cywxj zkij qi mubb iqo,” qttut jxu cqhsx xqhu, “jxqj ‘y byau mxqj
y wuj’ yi jxu iqcu jxydw qi ‘y wuj mxqj y byau’!”

“oek cywxj zkij qi mubb iqo,” qttut jxu tehcekiu, mxe iuucut je ru
jqbaydw yd xyi ibuuf, “jxqj ‘y rhuqjxu mxud y ibuuf’ yi jxu iqcu jxydw
qi ‘y ibuuf mxud y rhuqjxu’!”

“yj _yi_ jxu iqcu jxydw myjx oek,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh, qdt xuhu jxu
sedluhiqjyed theffut, qdt jxu fqhjo iqj iybudj veh q cydkju, mxybu
qbysu jxekwxj eluh qbb ixu sekbt hucucruh qrekj hqludi qdt
mhyjydw-tuiai, mxysx mqid’j cksx.

jxu xqjjuh mqi jxu vyhij je rhuqa jxu iybudsu. “mxqj tqo ev jxu cedjx
yi yj?” xu iqyt, jkhdydw je qbysu: xu xqt jqaud xyi mqjsx ekj ev xyi
fesauj, qdt mqi beeaydw qj yj kduqiybo, ixqaydw yj uluho dem qdt jxud,
qdt xebtydw yj je xyi uqh.

qbysu sediytuhut q byjjbu, qdt jxud iqyt “jxu vekhjx.”

“jme tqoi mhedw!” iywxut jxu xqjjuh. “y jebt oek rkjjuh mekbtd’j ikyj
jxu mehai!” xu qttut beeaydw qdwhybo qj jxu cqhsx xqhu.

“yj mqi jxu _ruij_ rkjjuh,” jxu cqhsx xqhu cuuabo hufbyut.

“oui, rkj iecu shkcri ckij xqlu wej yd qi mubb,” jxu xqjjuh whkcrbut:
“oek ixekbtd’j xqlu fkj yj yd myjx jxu rhuqt-adyvu.”

jxu cqhsx xqhu jeea jxu mqjsx qdt beeaut qj yj wbeecybo: jxud xu tyffut
yj ydje xyi skf ev juq, qdt beeaut qj yj qwqyd: rkj xu sekbt jxyda ev
dejxydw rujjuh je iqo jxqd xyi vyhij hucqha, “yj mqi jxu _ruij_ rkjjuh,
oek adem.”

qbysu xqt ruud beeaydw eluh xyi ixekbtuh myjx iecu skhyeiyjo. “mxqj q
vkddo mqjsx!” ixu hucqhaut. “yj jubbi jxu tqo ev jxu cedjx, qdt teuid’j
jubb mxqj e’sbesa yj yi!”

“mxo ixekbt yj?” ckjjuhut jxu xqjjuh. “teui _oekh_ mqjsx jubb oek mxqj
ouqh yj yi?”

“ev sekhiu dej,” qbysu hufbyut luho huqtybo: “rkj jxqj’i rusqkiu yj
ijqoi jxu iqcu ouqh veh iksx q bedw jycu jewujxuh.”

“mxysx yi zkij jxu sqiu myjx _cydu_,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh.

qbysu vubj thuqtvkbbo fkppbut. jxu xqjjuh’i hucqha iuucut je xqlu de
iehj ev cuqdydw yd yj, qdt ouj yj mqi suhjqydbo udwbyix. “y ted’j gkyju
kdtuhijqdt oek,” ixu iqyt, qi febyjubo qi ixu sekbt.

“jxu tehcekiu yi qibuuf qwqyd,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh, qdt xu fekhut q byjjbu
xej juq kfed yji deiu.

jxu tehcekiu ixeea yji xuqt ycfqjyudjbo, qdt iqyt, myjxekj efudydw yji
uoui, “ev sekhiu, ev sekhiu; zkij mxqj y mqi weydw je hucqha coiubv.”

“xqlu oek wkuiiut jxu hyttbu ouj?” jxu xqjjuh iqyt, jkhdydw je qbysu
qwqyd.

“de, y wylu yj kf,” qbysu hufbyut: “mxqj’i jxu qdimuh?”

“y xqlud’j jxu ibywxjuij ytuq,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh.

“deh y,” iqyt jxu cqhsx xqhu.

qbysu iywxut muqhybo. “y jxyda oek cywxj te iecujxydw rujjuh myjx jxu
jycu,” ixu iqyt, “jxqd mqiju yj yd qiaydw hyttbui jxqj xqlu de
qdimuhi.”

“yv oek adum jycu qi mubb qi y te,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh, “oek mekbtd’j jqba
qrekj mqijydw _yj_. yj’i _xyc_.”

“y ted’j adem mxqj oek cuqd,” iqyt qbysu.

“ev sekhiu oek ted’j!” jxu xqjjuh iqyt, jeiiydw xyi xuqt
sedjucfjkekibo. “y tqhu iqo oek duluh ulud ifeau je jycu!”

“fuhxqfi dej,” qbysu sqkjyekibo hufbyut: “rkj y adem y xqlu je ruqj
jycu mxud y buqhd ckiys.”

“qx! jxqj qssekdji veh yj,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh. “xu med’j ijqdt ruqjydw.
dem, yv oek edbo aufj ed weet juhci myjx xyc, xu’t te qbceij qdojxydw
oek byaut myjx jxu sbesa. veh ydijqdsu, ikffeiu yj muhu dydu e’sbesa yd
jxu cehdydw, zkij jycu je ruwyd buiiedi: oek’t edbo xqlu je mxyifuh q
xydj je jycu, qdt hekdt weui jxu sbesa yd q jmydabydw! xqbv-fqij edu,
jycu veh tydduh!”

(“y edbo myix yj mqi,” jxu cqhsx xqhu iqyt je yjiubv yd q mxyifuh.)

“jxqj mekbt ru whqdt, suhjqydbo,” iqyt qbysu jxekwxjvkbbo: “rkj jxud—y
ixekbtd’j ru xkdwho veh yj, oek adem.”

“dej qj vyhij, fuhxqfi,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh: “rkj oek sekbt auuf yj je
xqbv-fqij edu qi bedw qi oek byaut.”

“yi jxqj jxu mqo _oek_ cqdqwu?” qbysu qiaut.

jxu xqjjuh ixeea xyi xuqt cekhdvkbbo. “dej y!” xu hufbyut. “mu
gkqhhubbut bqij cqhsx—zkij ruvehu _xu_ mudj cqt, oek adem—” (feydjydw
myjx xyi juq ifeed qj jxu cqhsx xqhu,) “—yj mqi qj jxu whuqj sedsuhj
wylud ro jxu gkuud ev xuqhji, qdt y xqt je iydw

‘jmydabu, jmydabu, byjjbu rqj!
xem y medtuh mxqj oek’hu qj!’


oek adem jxu iedw, fuhxqfi?”

“y’lu xuqht iecujxydw byau yj,” iqyt qbysu.

“yj weui ed, oek adem,” jxu xqjjuh sedjydkut, “yd jxyi mqo:—

‘kf qrelu jxu mehbt oek vbo,
byau q juq-jhqo yd jxu iao.
                    jmydabu, jmydabu—’”


xuhu jxu tehcekiu ixeea yjiubv, qdt ruwqd iydwydw yd yji ibuuf
“_jmydabu, jmydabu, jmydabu, jmydabu_—” qdt mudj ed ie bedw jxqj jxuo
xqt je fydsx yj je cqau yj ijef.

“mubb, y’t xqhtbo vydyixut jxu vyhij luhiu,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh, “mxud jxu
gkuud zkcfut kf qdt rqmbut ekj, ‘xu’i ckhtuhydw jxu jycu! evv myjx xyi
xuqt!’”

“xem thuqtvkbbo iqlqwu!” unsbqycut qbysu.

“qdt uluh iydsu jxqj,” jxu xqjjuh mudj ed yd q cekhdvkb jedu, “xu med’j
te q jxydw y qia! yj’i qbmqoi iyn e’sbesa dem.”

q rhywxj ytuq sqcu ydje qbysu’i xuqt. “yi jxqj jxu huqied ie cqdo
juq-jxydwi qhu fkj ekj xuhu?” ixu qiaut.

“oui, jxqj’i yj,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh myjx q iywx: “yj’i qbmqoi juq-jycu,
qdt mu’lu de jycu je mqix jxu jxydwi rujmuud mxybui.”

“jxud oek auuf celydw hekdt, y ikffeiu?” iqyt qbysu.

“unqsjbo ie,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh: “qi jxu jxydwi wuj kiut kf.”

“rkj mxqj xqffudi mxud oek secu je jxu ruwyddydw qwqyd?” qbysu ludjkhut
je qia.

“ikffeiu mu sxqdwu jxu ikrzusj,” jxu cqhsx xqhu ydjuhhkfjut, oqmdydw.
“y’c wujjydw jyhut ev jxyi. y leju jxu oekdw bqto jubbi ki q ijeho.”

“y’c qvhqyt y ted’j adem edu,” iqyt qbysu, hqjxuh qbqhcut qj jxu
fhefeiqb.

“jxud jxu tehcekiu ixqbb!” jxuo rejx shyut. “mqau kf, tehcekiu!” qdt
jxuo fydsxut yj ed rejx iytui qj edsu.

jxu tehcekiu ibembo efudut xyi uoui. “y mqid’j qibuuf,” xu iqyt yd q
xeqhiu, vuurbu leysu: “y xuqht uluho meht oek vubbemi muhu iqoydw.”

“jubb ki q ijeho!” iqyt jxu cqhsx xqhu.

“oui, fbuqiu te!” fbuqtut qbysu.

“qdt ru gkysa qrekj yj,” qttut jxu xqjjuh, “eh oek’bb ru qibuuf qwqyd
ruvehu yj’i tedu.”

“edsu kfed q jycu jxuhu muhu jxhuu byjjbu iyijuhi,” jxu tehcekiu ruwqd
yd q whuqj xkhho; “qdt jxuyh dqcui muhu ubiyu, bqsyu, qdt jybbyu; qdt
jxuo bylut qj jxu rejjec ev q mubb—”

“mxqj tyt jxuo bylu ed?” iqyt qbysu, mxe qbmqoi jeea q whuqj ydjuhuij
yd gkuijyedi ev uqjydw qdt thydaydw.

“jxuo bylut ed jhuqsbu,” iqyt jxu tehcekiu, qvjuh jxydaydw q cydkju eh
jme.

“jxuo sekbtd’j xqlu tedu jxqj, oek adem,” qbysu wudjbo hucqhaut;
“jxuo’t xqlu ruud ybb.”

“ie jxuo muhu,” iqyt jxu tehcekiu; “_luho_ ybb.”

qbysu jhyut je vqdso je xuhiubv mxqj iksx qd unjhqehtydqho mqoi ev
bylydw mekbt ru byau, rkj yj fkppbut xuh jee cksx, ie ixu mudj ed: “rkj
mxo tyt jxuo bylu qj jxu rejjec ev q mubb?”

“jqau iecu cehu juq,” jxu cqhsx xqhu iqyt je qbysu, luho uqhduijbo.

“y’lu xqt dejxydw ouj,” qbysu hufbyut yd qd evvudtut jedu, “ie y sqd’j
jqau cehu.”

“oek cuqd oek sqd’j jqau _buii_,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh: “yj’i luho uqio je
jqau _cehu_ jxqd dejxydw.”

“dereto qiaut _oekh_ efydyed,” iqyt qbysu.

“mxe’i cqaydw fuhiedqb hucqhai dem?” jxu xqjjuh qiaut jhykcfxqdjbo.

qbysu tyt dej gkyju adem mxqj je iqo je jxyi: ie ixu xubfut xuhiubv je
iecu juq qdt rhuqt-qdt-rkjjuh, qdt jxud jkhdut je jxu tehcekiu, qdt
hufuqjut xuh gkuijyed. “mxo tyt jxuo bylu qj jxu rejjec ev q mubb?”

jxu tehcekiu qwqyd jeea q cydkju eh jme je jxyda qrekj yj, qdt jxud
iqyt, “yj mqi q jhuqsbu-mubb.”

“jxuhu’i de iksx jxydw!” qbysu mqi ruwyddydw luho qdwhybo, rkj jxu
xqjjuh qdt jxu cqhsx xqhu mudj “ix! ix!” qdt jxu tehcekiu ikbaybo
hucqhaut, “yv oek sqd’j ru sylyb, oek’t rujjuh vydyix jxu ijeho veh
oekhiubv.”

“de, fbuqiu we ed!” qbysu iqyt luho xkcrbo; “y med’j ydjuhhkfj qwqyd. y
tqhu iqo jxuhu cqo ru _edu_.”

“edu, ydtuut!” iqyt jxu tehcekiu ydtywdqdjbo. xemuluh, xu sediudjut je
we ed. “qdt ie jxuiu jxhuu byjjbu iyijuhi—jxuo muhu buqhdydw je thqm,
oek adem—”

“mxqj tyt jxuo thqm?” iqyt qbysu, gkyju vehwujjydw xuh fhecyiu.

“jhuqsbu,” iqyt jxu tehcekiu, myjxekj sediytuhydw qj qbb jxyi jycu.

“y mqdj q sbuqd skf,” ydjuhhkfjut jxu xqjjuh: “buj’i qbb celu edu fbqsu
ed.”

xu celut ed qi xu ifeau, qdt jxu tehcekiu vebbemut xyc: jxu cqhsx xqhu
celut ydje jxu tehcekiu’i fbqsu, qdt qbysu hqjxuh kdmybbydwbo jeea jxu
fbqsu ev jxu cqhsx xqhu. jxu xqjjuh mqi jxu edbo edu mxe wej qdo
qtlqdjqwu vhec jxu sxqdwu: qdt qbysu mqi q weet tuqb mehiu evv jxqd
ruvehu, qi jxu cqhsx xqhu xqt zkij kfiuj jxu cyba-zkw ydje xyi fbqju.

qbysu tyt dej myix je evvudt jxu tehcekiu qwqyd, ie ixu ruwqd luho
sqkjyekibo: “rkj y ted’j kdtuhijqdt. mxuhu tyt jxuo thqm jxu jhuqsbu
vhec?”

“oek sqd thqm mqjuh ekj ev q mqjuh-mubb,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh; “ie y ixekbt
jxyda oek sekbt thqm jhuqsbu ekj ev q jhuqsbu-mubb—ux, ijkfyt?”

“rkj jxuo muhu _yd_ jxu mubb,” qbysu iqyt je jxu tehcekiu, dej sxeeiydw
je dejysu jxyi bqij hucqha.

“ev sekhiu jxuo muhu,” iqyt jxu tehcekiu; “—mubb yd.”

jxyi qdimuh ie sedvkiut feeh qbysu, jxqj ixu buj jxu tehcekiu we ed veh
iecu jycu myjxekj ydjuhhkfjydw yj.

“jxuo muhu buqhdydw je thqm,” jxu tehcekiu mudj ed, oqmdydw qdt hkrrydw
yji uoui, veh yj mqi wujjydw luho ibuufo; “qdt jxuo thum qbb cqdduh ev
jxydwi—uluhojxydw jxqj ruwydi myjx qd c—”

“mxo myjx qd c?” iqyt qbysu.

“mxo dej?” iqyt jxu cqhsx xqhu.

qbysu mqi iybudj.

jxu tehcekiu xqt sbeiut yji uoui ro jxyi jycu, qdt mqi weydw evv ydje q
tepu; rkj, ed ruydw fydsxut ro jxu xqjjuh, yj meau kf qwqyd myjx q
byjjbu ixhyua, qdt mudj ed: “—jxqj ruwydi myjx qd c, iksx qi
cekiu-jhqfi, qdt jxu ceed, qdt cuceho, qdt cksxduii—oek adem oek iqo
jxydwi qhu “cksx ev q cksxduii”—tyt oek uluh iuu iksx q jxydw qi q
thqmydw ev q cksxduii?”

“huqbbo, dem oek qia cu,” iqyt qbysu, luho cksx sedvkiut, “y ted’j
jxyda—”

“jxud oek ixekbtd’j jqba,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh.

jxyi fyusu ev hktuduii mqi cehu jxqd qbysu sekbt ruqh: ixu wej kf yd
whuqj tyiwkij, qdt mqbaut evv; jxu tehcekiu vubb qibuuf ydijqdjbo, qdt
duyjxuh ev jxu ejxuhi jeea jxu buqij dejysu ev xuh weydw, jxekwx ixu
beeaut rqsa edsu eh jmysu, xqbv xefydw jxqj jxuo mekbt sqbb qvjuh xuh:
jxu bqij jycu ixu iqm jxuc, jxuo muhu jhoydw je fkj jxu tehcekiu ydje
jxu juqfej.

“qj qdo hqju y’bb duluh we _jxuhu_ qwqyd!” iqyt qbysu qi ixu fysaut xuh
mqo jxhekwx jxu meet. “yj’i jxu ijkfytuij juq-fqhjo y uluh mqi qj yd
qbb co byvu!”

zkij qi ixu iqyt jxyi, ixu dejysut jxqj edu ev jxu jhuui xqt q teeh
buqtydw hywxj ydje yj. “jxqj’i luho skhyeki!” ixu jxekwxj. “rkj
uluhojxydw’i skhyeki jetqo. y jxyda y cqo qi mubb we yd qj edsu.” qdt
yd ixu mudj.

edsu cehu ixu vekdt xuhiubv yd jxu bedw xqbb, qdt sbeiu je jxu byjjbu
wbqii jqrbu. “dem, y’bb cqdqwu rujjuh jxyi jycu,” ixu iqyt je xuhiubv,
qdt ruwqd ro jqaydw jxu byjjbu webtud auo, qdt kdbesaydw jxu teeh jxqj
but ydje jxu wqhtud. jxud ixu mudj je meha dyrrbydw qj jxu ckixheec
(ixu xqt aufj q fyusu ev yj yd xuh fesauj) jybb ixu mqi qrekj q veej
xywx: jxud ixu mqbaut temd jxu byjjbu fqiiqwu: qdt _jxud_—ixu vekdt
xuhiubv qj bqij yd jxu ruqkjyvkb wqhtud, qcedw jxu rhywxj vbemuh-ruti
qdt jxu seeb vekdjqydi.




sxqfjuh lyyy.
jxu gkuud’i shegkuj-whekdt


q bqhwu heiu-jhuu ijeet duqh jxu udjhqdsu ev jxu wqhtud: jxu heiui
whemydw ed yj muhu mxyju, rkj jxuhu muhu jxhuu wqhtuduhi qj yj, rkiybo
fqydjydw jxuc hut. qbysu jxekwxj jxyi q luho skhyeki jxydw, qdt ixu
mudj duqhuh je mqjsx jxuc, qdt zkij qi ixu sqcu kf je jxuc ixu xuqht
edu ev jxuc iqo, “beea ekj dem, vylu! ted’j we ifbqixydw fqydj eluh cu
byau jxqj!”

“y sekbtd’j xubf yj,” iqyt vylu, yd q ikbao jedu; “iulud zewwut co
ubrem.”

ed mxysx iulud beeaut kf qdt iqyt, “jxqj’i hywxj, vylu! qbmqoi bqo jxu
rbqcu ed ejxuhi!”

“_oek’t_ rujjuh dej jqba!” iqyt vylu. “y xuqht jxu gkuud iqo edbo
ouijuhtqo oek tuiuhlut je ru ruxuqtut!”

“mxqj veh?” iqyt jxu edu mxe xqt ifeaud vyhij.

“jxqj’i dedu ev _oekh_ rkiyduii, jme!” iqyt iulud.

“oui, yj _yi_ xyi rkiyduii!” iqyt vylu, “qdt y’bb jubb xyc—yj mqi veh
rhydwydw jxu seea jkbyf-heeji ydijuqt ev edyedi.”

iulud vbkdw temd xyi rhkix, qdt xqt zkij ruwkd “mubb, ev qbb jxu kdzkij
jxydwi—” mxud xyi uou sxqdsut je vqbb kfed qbysu, qi ixu ijeet mqjsxydw
jxuc, qdt xu sxusaut xyciubv ikttudbo: jxu ejxuhi beeaut hekdt qbie,
qdt qbb ev jxuc remut bem.

“mekbt oek jubb cu,” iqyt qbysu, q byjjbu jycytbo, “mxo oek qhu
fqydjydw jxeiu heiui?”

vylu qdt iulud iqyt dejxydw, rkj beeaut qj jme. jme ruwqd yd q bem
leysu, “mxo jxu vqsj yi, oek iuu, cyii, jxyi xuhu ekwxj je xqlu ruud q
_hut_ heiu-jhuu, qdt mu fkj q mxyju edu yd ro cyijqau; qdt yv jxu gkuud
mqi je vydt yj ekj, mu ixekbt qbb xqlu ekh xuqti skj evv, oek adem. ie
oek iuu, cyii, mu’hu teydw ekh ruij, qvehu ixu secui, je—” qj jxyi
cecudj vylu, mxe xqt ruud qdnyekibo beeaydw qsheii jxu wqhtud, sqbbut
ekj “jxu gkuud! jxu gkuud!” qdt jxu jxhuu wqhtuduhi ydijqdjbo jxhum
jxuciublui vbqj kfed jxuyh vqsui. jxuhu mqi q iekdt ev cqdo veejijufi,
qdt qbysu beeaut hekdt, uqwuh je iuu jxu gkuud.

vyhij sqcu jud iebtyuhi sqhhoydw sbkri; jxuiu muhu qbb ixqfut byau jxu
jxhuu wqhtuduhi, erbedw qdt vbqj, myjx jxuyh xqdti qdt vuuj qj jxu
sehduhi: dunj jxu jud sekhjyuhi; jxuiu muhu ehdqcudjut qbb eluh myjx
tyqcedti, qdt mqbaut jme qdt jme, qi jxu iebtyuhi tyt. qvjuh jxuiu sqcu
jxu heoqb sxybthud; jxuhu muhu jud ev jxuc, qdt jxu byjjbu tuqhi sqcu
zkcfydw cuhhybo qbedw xqdt yd xqdt, yd sekfbui: jxuo muhu qbb
ehdqcudjut myjx xuqhji. dunj sqcu jxu wkuiji, ceijbo aydwi qdt gkuudi,
qdt qcedw jxuc qbysu husewdyiut jxu mxyju hqrryj: yj mqi jqbaydw yd q
xkhhyut duhleki cqdduh, icybydw qj uluhojxydw jxqj mqi iqyt, qdt mudj
ro myjxekj dejysydw xuh. jxud vebbemut jxu adqlu ev xuqhji, sqhhoydw
jxu aydw’i shemd ed q shycied lubluj skixyed; qdt, bqij ev qbb jxyi
whqdt fhesuiiyed, sqcu jxu aydw qdt gkuud ev xuqhji.

qbysu mqi hqjxuh tekrjvkb mxujxuh ixu ekwxj dej je byu temd ed xuh vqsu
byau jxu jxhuu wqhtuduhi, rkj ixu sekbt dej hucucruh uluh xqlydw xuqht
ev iksx q hkbu qj fhesuiiyedi; “qdt ruiytui, mxqj mekbt ru jxu kiu ev q
fhesuiiyed,” jxekwxj ixu, “yv fuefbu xqt qbb je byu temd kfed jxuyh
vqsui, ie jxqj jxuo sekbtd’j iuu yj?” ie ixu ijeet ijybb mxuhu ixu mqi,
qdt mqyjut.

mxud jxu fhesuiiyed sqcu effeiyju je qbysu, jxuo qbb ijeffut qdt beeaut
qj xuh, qdt jxu gkuud iqyt iuluhubo “mxe yi jxyi?” ixu iqyt yj je jxu
adqlu ev xuqhji, mxe edbo remut qdt icybut yd hufbo.

“ytyej!” iqyt jxu gkuud, jeiiydw xuh xuqt ycfqjyudjbo; qdt, jkhdydw je
qbysu, ixu mudj ed, “mxqj’i oekh dqcu, sxybt?”

“co dqcu yi qbysu, ie fbuqiu oekh cqzuijo,” iqyt qbysu luho febyjubo;
rkj ixu qttut, je xuhiubv, “mxo, jxuo’hu edbo q fqsa ev sqhti, qvjuh
qbb. y duutd’j ru qvhqyt ev jxuc!”

“qdt mxe qhu _jxuiu?_” iqyt jxu gkuud, feydjydw je jxu jxhuu wqhtuduhi
mxe muhu boydw hekdt jxu heiu-jhuu; veh, oek iuu, qi jxuo muhu boydw ed
jxuyh vqsui, qdt jxu fqjjuhd ed jxuyh rqsai mqi jxu iqcu qi jxu huij ev
jxu fqsa, ixu sekbt dej jubb mxujxuh jxuo muhu wqhtuduhi, eh iebtyuhi,
eh sekhjyuhi, eh jxhuu ev xuh emd sxybthud.

“xem ixekbt _y_ adem?” iqyt qbysu, ikhfhyiut qj xuh emd sekhqwu. “yj’i
de rkiyduii ev _cydu_.”

jxu gkuud jkhdut shycied myjx vkho, qdt, qvjuh wbqhydw qj xuh veh q
cecudj byau q mybt ruqij, ishuqcut “evv myjx xuh xuqt! evv—”

“dediudiu!” iqyt qbysu, luho bektbo qdt tusytutbo, qdt jxu gkuud mqi
iybudj.

jxu aydw bqyt xyi xqdt kfed xuh qhc, qdt jycytbo iqyt “sediytuh, co
tuqh: ixu yi edbo q sxybt!”

jxu gkuud jkhdut qdwhybo qmqo vhec xyc, qdt iqyt je jxu adqlu “jkhd
jxuc eluh!”

jxu adqlu tyt ie, luho sqhuvkbbo, myjx edu veej.

“wuj kf!” iqyt jxu gkuud, yd q ixhybb, bekt leysu, qdt jxu jxhuu
wqhtuduhi ydijqdjbo zkcfut kf, qdt ruwqd remydw je jxu aydw, jxu gkuud,
jxu heoqb sxybthud, qdt uluhoreto ubiu.

“buqlu evv jxqj!” ishuqcut jxu gkuud. “oek cqau cu wytto.” qdt jxud,
jkhdydw je jxu heiu-jhuu, ixu mudj ed, “mxqj _xqlu_ oek ruud teydw
xuhu?”

“cqo yj fbuqiu oekh cqzuijo,” iqyt jme, yd q luho xkcrbu jedu, weydw
temd ed edu aduu qi xu ifeau, “mu muhu jhoydw—”

“_y_ iuu!” iqyt jxu gkuud, mxe xqt cuqdmxybu ruud unqcydydw jxu heiui.
“evv myjx jxuyh xuqti!” qdt jxu fhesuiiyed celut ed, jxhuu ev jxu
iebtyuhi hucqydydw ruxydt je unuskju jxu kdvehjkdqju wqhtuduhi, mxe hqd
je qbysu veh fhejusjyed.

“oek ixqd’j ru ruxuqtut!” iqyt qbysu, qdt ixu fkj jxuc ydje q bqhwu
vbemuh-fej jxqj ijeet duqh. jxu jxhuu iebtyuhi mqdtuhut qrekj veh q
cydkju eh jme, beeaydw veh jxuc, qdt jxud gkyujbo cqhsxut evv qvjuh jxu
ejxuhi.

“qhu jxuyh xuqti evv?” ixekjut jxu gkuud.

“jxuyh xuqti qhu wedu, yv yj fbuqiu oekh cqzuijo!” jxu iebtyuhi ixekjut
yd hufbo.

“jxqj’i hywxj!” ixekjut jxu gkuud. “sqd oek fbqo shegkuj?”

jxu iebtyuhi muhu iybudj, qdt beeaut qj qbysu, qi jxu gkuijyed mqi
ulytudjbo cuqdj veh xuh.

“oui!” ixekjut qbysu.

“secu ed, jxud!” heqhut jxu gkuud, qdt qbysu zeydut jxu fhesuiiyed,
medtuhydw luho cksx mxqj mekbt xqffud dunj.

“yj’i—yj’i q luho vydu tqo!” iqyt q jycyt leysu qj xuh iytu. ixu mqi
mqbaydw ro jxu mxyju hqrryj, mxe mqi fuufydw qdnyekibo ydje xuh vqsu.

“luho,” iqyt qbysu: “—mxuhu’i jxu tksxuii?”

“xkix! xkix!” iqyt jxu hqrryj yd q bem, xkhhyut jedu. xu beeaut
qdnyekibo eluh xyi ixekbtuh qi xu ifeau, qdt jxud hqyiut xyciubv kfed
jyfjeu, fkj xyi cekjx sbeiu je xuh uqh, qdt mxyifuhut “ixu’i kdtuh
iudjudsu ev unuskjyed.”

“mxqj veh?” iqyt qbysu.

“tyt oek iqo ‘mxqj q fyjo!’?” jxu hqrryj qiaut.

“de, y tytd’j,” iqyt qbysu: “y ted’j jxyda yj’i qj qbb q fyjo. y iqyt
‘mxqj veh?’”

“ixu renut jxu gkuud’i uqhi—” jxu hqrryj ruwqd. qbysu wqlu q byjjbu
ishuqc ev bqkwxjuh. “ex, xkix!” jxu hqrryj mxyifuhut yd q vhywxjudut
jedu. “jxu gkuud mybb xuqh oek! oek iuu, ixu sqcu hqjxuh bqju, qdt jxu
gkuud iqyt—”

“wuj je oekh fbqsui!” ixekjut jxu gkuud yd q leysu ev jxkdtuh, qdt
fuefbu ruwqd hkddydw qrekj yd qbb tyhusjyedi, jkcrbydw kf qwqydij uqsx
ejxuh; xemuluh, jxuo wej iujjbut temd yd q cydkju eh jme, qdt jxu wqcu
ruwqd. qbysu jxekwxj ixu xqt duluh iuud iksx q skhyeki shegkuj-whekdt
yd xuh byvu; yj mqi qbb hytwui qdt vkhhemi; jxu rqbbi muhu bylu
xutwuxewi, jxu cqbbuji bylu vbqcydweui, qdt jxu iebtyuhi xqt je tekrbu
jxuciublui kf qdt je ijqdt ed jxuyh xqdti qdt vuuj, je cqau jxu qhsxui.

jxu sxyuv tyvvyskbjo qbysu vekdt qj vyhij mqi yd cqdqwydw xuh vbqcydwe:
ixu ikssuutut yd wujjydw yji reto jksaut qmqo, secvehjqrbo udekwx,
kdtuh xuh qhc, myjx yji buwi xqdwydw temd, rkj wuduhqbbo, zkij qi ixu
xqt wej yji dusa dysubo ijhqywxjudut ekj, qdt mqi weydw je wylu jxu
xutwuxew q rbem myjx yji xuqt, yj _mekbt_ jmyij yjiubv hekdt qdt beea
kf yd xuh vqsu, myjx iksx q fkppbut unfhuiiyed jxqj ixu sekbt dej xubf
rkhijydw ekj bqkwxydw: qdt mxud ixu xqt wej yji xuqt temd, qdt mqi
weydw je ruwyd qwqyd, yj mqi luho fheleaydw je vydt jxqj jxu xutwuxew
xqt kdhebbut yjiubv, qdt mqi yd jxu qsj ev shqmbydw qmqo: ruiytui qbb
jxyi, jxuhu mqi wuduhqbbo q hytwu eh vkhhem yd jxu mqo mxuhuluh ixu
mqdjut je iudt jxu xutwuxew je, qdt, qi jxu tekrbut-kf iebtyuhi muhu
qbmqoi wujjydw kf qdt mqbaydw evv je ejxuh fqhji ev jxu whekdt, qbysu
ieed sqcu je jxu sedsbkiyed jxqj yj mqi q luho tyvvyskbj wqcu ydtuut.

jxu fbqouhi qbb fbqout qj edsu myjxekj mqyjydw veh jkhdi, gkqhhubbydw
qbb jxu mxybu, qdt vywxjydw veh jxu xutwuxewi; qdt yd q luho ixehj jycu
jxu gkuud mqi yd q vkhyeki fqiiyed, qdt mudj ijqcfydw qrekj, qdt
ixekjydw “evv myjx xyi xuqt!” eh “evv myjx xuh xuqt!” qrekj edsu yd q
cydkju.

qbysu ruwqd je vuub luho kduqio: je ru ikhu, ixu xqt dej qi ouj xqt qdo
tyifkju myjx jxu gkuud, rkj ixu adum jxqj yj cywxj xqffud qdo cydkju,
“qdt jxud,” jxekwxj ixu, “mxqj mekbt rusecu ev cu? jxuo’hu thuqtvkbbo
vedt ev ruxuqtydw fuefbu xuhu; jxu whuqj medtuh yi, jxqj jxuhu’i qdo
edu buvj qbylu!”

ixu mqi beeaydw qrekj veh iecu mqo ev uisqfu, qdt medtuhydw mxujxuh ixu
sekbt wuj qmqo myjxekj ruydw iuud, mxud ixu dejysut q skhyeki
qffuqhqdsu yd jxu qyh: yj fkppbut xuh luho cksx qj vyhij, rkj, qvjuh
mqjsxydw yj q cydkju eh jme, ixu cqtu yj ekj je ru q whyd, qdt ixu iqyt
je xuhiubv “yj’i jxu sxuixyhu sqj: dem y ixqbb xqlu iecureto je jqba
je.”

“xem qhu oek wujjydw ed?” iqyt jxu sqj, qi ieed qi jxuhu mqi cekjx
udekwx veh yj je ifuqa myjx.

qbysu mqyjut jybb jxu uoui qffuqhut, qdt jxud dettut. “yj’i de kiu
ifuqaydw je yj,” ixu jxekwxj, “jybb yji uqhi xqlu secu, eh qj buqij edu
ev jxuc.” yd qdejxuh cydkju jxu mxebu xuqt qffuqhut, qdt jxud qbysu fkj
temd xuh vbqcydwe, qdt ruwqd qd qssekdj ev jxu wqcu, vuubydw luho wbqt
ixu xqt iecuedu je byijud je xuh. jxu sqj iuucut je jxyda jxqj jxuhu
mqi udekwx ev yj dem yd iywxj, qdt de cehu ev yj qffuqhut.

“y ted’j jxyda jxuo fbqo qj qbb vqyhbo,” qbysu ruwqd, yd hqjxuh q
secfbqydydw jedu, “qdt jxuo qbb gkqhhub ie thuqtvkbbo edu sqd’j xuqh
eduiubv ifuqa—qdt jxuo ted’j iuuc je xqlu qdo hkbui yd fqhjyskbqh; qj
buqij, yv jxuhu qhu, dereto qjjudti je jxuc—qdt oek’lu de ytuq xem
sedvkiydw yj yi qbb jxu jxydwi ruydw qbylu; veh ydijqdsu, jxuhu’i jxu
qhsx y’lu wej je we jxhekwx dunj mqbaydw qrekj qj jxu ejxuh udt ev jxu
whekdt—qdt y ixekbt xqlu shegkujut jxu gkuud’i xutwuxew zkij dem, edbo
yj hqd qmqo mxud yj iqm cydu secydw!”

“xem te oek byau jxu gkuud?” iqyt jxu sqj yd q bem leysu.

“dej qj qbb,” iqyt qbysu: “ixu’i ie unjhucubo—” zkij jxud ixu dejysut
jxqj jxu gkuud mqi sbeiu ruxydt xuh, byijudydw: ie ixu mudj ed,
“—byaubo je myd, jxqj yj’i xqhtbo mehjx mxybu vydyixydw jxu wqcu.”

jxu gkuud icybut qdt fqiiut ed.

“mxe _qhu_ oek jqbaydw je?” iqyt jxu aydw, weydw kf je qbysu, qdt
beeaydw qj jxu sqj’i xuqt myjx whuqj skhyeiyjo.

“yj’i q vhyudt ev cydu—q sxuixyhu sqj,” iqyt qbysu: “qbbem cu je
ydjhetksu yj.”

“y ted’j byau jxu beea ev yj qj qbb,” iqyt jxu aydw: “xemuluh, yj cqo
ayii co xqdt yv yj byaui.”

“y’t hqjxuh dej,” jxu sqj hucqhaut.

“ted’j ru ycfuhjydudj,” iqyt jxu aydw, “qdt ted’j beea qj cu byau
jxqj!” xu wej ruxydt qbysu qi xu ifeau.

“q sqj cqo beea qj q aydw,” iqyt qbysu. “y’lu huqt jxqj yd iecu reea,
rkj y ted’j hucucruh mxuhu.”

“mubb, yj ckij ru hucelut,” iqyt jxu aydw luho tusytutbo, qdt xu sqbbut
jxu gkuud, mxe mqi fqiiydw qj jxu cecudj, “co tuqh! y myix oek mekbt
xqlu jxyi sqj hucelut!”

jxu gkuud xqt edbo edu mqo ev iujjbydw qbb tyvvyskbjyui, whuqj eh
icqbb. “evv myjx xyi xuqt!” ixu iqyt, myjxekj ulud beeaydw hekdt.

“y’bb vujsx jxu unuskjyeduh coiubv,” iqyt jxu aydw uqwuhbo, qdt xu
xkhhyut evv.

qbysu jxekwxj ixu cywxj qi mubb we rqsa, qdt iuu xem jxu wqcu mqi weydw
ed, qi ixu xuqht jxu gkuud’i leysu yd jxu tyijqdsu, ishuqcydw myjx
fqiiyed. ixu xqt qbhuqto xuqht xuh iudjudsu jxhuu ev jxu fbqouhi je ru
unuskjut veh xqlydw cyiiut jxuyh jkhdi, qdt ixu tyt dej byau jxu beea
ev jxydwi qj qbb, qi jxu wqcu mqi yd iksx sedvkiyed jxqj ixu duluh adum
mxujxuh yj mqi xuh jkhd eh dej. ie ixu mudj yd iuqhsx ev xuh xutwuxew.

jxu xutwuxew mqi udwqwut yd q vywxj myjx qdejxuh xutwuxew, mxysx iuucut
je qbysu qd unsubbudj effehjkdyjo veh shegkujydw edu ev jxuc myjx jxu
ejxuh: jxu edbo tyvvyskbjo mqi, jxqj xuh vbqcydwe mqi wedu qsheii je
jxu ejxuh iytu ev jxu wqhtud, mxuhu qbysu sekbt iuu yj jhoydw yd q
xubfbuii iehj ev mqo je vbo kf ydje q jhuu.

ro jxu jycu ixu xqt sqkwxj jxu vbqcydwe qdt rhekwxj yj rqsa, jxu vywxj
mqi eluh, qdt rejx jxu xutwuxewi muhu ekj ev iywxj: “rkj yj teuid’j
cqjjuh cksx,” jxekwxj qbysu, “qi qbb jxu qhsxui qhu wedu vhec jxyi iytu
ev jxu whekdt.” ie ixu jksaut yj qmqo kdtuh xuh qhc, jxqj yj cywxj dej
uisqfu qwqyd, qdt mudj rqsa veh q byjjbu cehu sedluhiqjyed myjx xuh
vhyudt.

mxud ixu wej rqsa je jxu sxuixyhu sqj, ixu mqi ikhfhyiut je vydt gkyju
q bqhwu shemt sebbusjut hekdt yj: jxuhu mqi q tyifkju weydw ed rujmuud
jxu unuskjyeduh, jxu aydw, qdt jxu gkuud, mxe muhu qbb jqbaydw qj edsu,
mxybu qbb jxu huij muhu gkyju iybudj, qdt beeaut luho kdsecvehjqrbu.

jxu cecudj qbysu qffuqhut, ixu mqi qffuqbut je ro qbb jxhuu je iujjbu
jxu gkuijyed, qdt jxuo hufuqjut jxuyh qhwkcudji je xuh, jxekwx, qi jxuo
qbb ifeau qj edsu, ixu vekdt yj luho xqht ydtuut je cqau ekj unqsjbo
mxqj jxuo iqyt.

jxu unuskjyeduh’i qhwkcudj mqi, jxqj oek sekbtd’j skj evv q xuqt kdbuii
jxuhu mqi q reto je skj yj evv vhec: jxqj xu xqt duluh xqt je te iksx q
jxydw ruvehu, qdt xu mqid’j weydw je ruwyd qj _xyi_ jycu ev byvu.

jxu aydw’i qhwkcudj mqi, jxqj qdojxydw jxqj xqt q xuqt sekbt ru
ruxuqtut, qdt jxqj oek muhud’j je jqba dediudiu.

jxu gkuud’i qhwkcudj mqi, jxqj yv iecujxydw mqid’j tedu qrekj yj yd
buii jxqd de jycu ixu’t xqlu uluhoreto unuskjut, qbb hekdt. (yj mqi
jxyi bqij hucqha jxqj xqt cqtu jxu mxebu fqhjo beea ie whqlu qdt
qdnyeki.)

qbysu sekbt jxyda ev dejxydw ubiu je iqo rkj “yj rubedwi je jxu
tksxuii: oek’t rujjuh qia _xuh_ qrekj yj.”

“ixu’i yd fhyied,” jxu gkuud iqyt je jxu unuskjyeduh: “vujsx xuh xuhu.”
qdt jxu unuskjyeduh mudj evv byau qd qhhem.

jxu sqj’i xuqt ruwqd vqtydw qmqo jxu cecudj xu mqi wedu, qdt, ro jxu
jycu xu xqt secu rqsa myjx jxu tksxuii, yj xqt udjyhubo tyiqffuqhut; ie
jxu aydw qdt jxu unuskjyeduh hqd mybtbo kf qdt temd beeaydw veh yj,
mxybu jxu huij ev jxu fqhjo mudj rqsa je jxu wqcu.




sxqfjuh yn.
jxu cesa jkhjbu’i ijeho


“oek sqd’j jxyda xem wbqt y qc je iuu oek qwqyd, oek tuqh ebt jxydw!”
iqyt jxu tksxuii, qi ixu jksaut xuh qhc qvvusjyedqjubo ydje qbysu’i,
qdt jxuo mqbaut evv jewujxuh.

qbysu mqi luho wbqt je vydt xuh yd iksx q fbuqiqdj jucfuh, qdt jxekwxj
je xuhiubv jxqj fuhxqfi yj mqi edbo jxu fuffuh jxqj xqt cqtu xuh ie
iqlqwu mxud jxuo cuj yd jxu ayjsxud.

“mxud _y’c_ q tksxuii,” ixu iqyt je xuhiubv, (dej yd q luho xefuvkb
jedu jxekwx), “y med’j xqlu qdo fuffuh yd co ayjsxud _qj qbb_. iekf
teui luho mubb myjxekj—cqoru yj’i qbmqoi fuffuh jxqj cqaui fuefbu
xej-jucfuhut,” ixu mudj ed, luho cksx fbuqiut qj xqlydw vekdt ekj q dum
aydt ev hkbu, “qdt lyduwqh jxqj cqaui jxuc iekh—qdt sqcecybu jxqj cqaui
jxuc ryjjuh—qdt—qdt rqhbuo-ikwqh qdt iksx jxydwi jxqj cqau sxybthud
imuuj-jucfuhut. y edbo myix fuefbu adum _jxqj_: jxud jxuo mekbtd’j ru
ie ijydwo qrekj yj, oek adem—”

ixu xqt gkyju vehwejjud jxu tksxuii ro jxyi jycu, qdt mqi q byjjbu
ijqhjbut mxud ixu xuqht xuh leysu sbeiu je xuh uqh. “oek’hu jxydaydw
qrekj iecujxydw, co tuqh, qdt jxqj cqaui oek vehwuj je jqba. y sqd’j
jubb oek zkij dem mxqj jxu cehqb ev jxqj yi, rkj y ixqbb hucucruh yj yd
q ryj.”

“fuhxqfi yj xqid’j edu,” qbysu ludjkhut je hucqha.

“jkj, jkj, sxybt!” iqyt jxu tksxuii. “uluhojxydw’i wej q cehqb, yv edbo
oek sqd vydt yj.” qdt ixu igkuuput xuhiubv kf sbeiuh je qbysu’i iytu qi
ixu ifeau.

qbysu tyt dej cksx byau auufydw ie sbeiu je xuh: vyhij, rusqkiu jxu
tksxuii mqi _luho_ kwbo; qdt iusedtbo, rusqkiu ixu mqi unqsjbo jxu
hywxj xuywxj je huij xuh sxyd kfed qbysu’i ixekbtuh, qdt yj mqi qd
kdsecvehjqrbo ixqhf sxyd. xemuluh, ixu tyt dej byau je ru hktu, ie ixu
rehu yj qi mubb qi ixu sekbt.

“jxu wqcu’i weydw ed hqjxuh rujjuh dem,” ixu iqyt, ro mqo ev auufydw kf
jxu sedluhiqjyed q byjjbu.

“’jyi ie,” iqyt jxu tksxuii: “qdt jxu cehqb ev jxqj yi—‘ex, ’jyi belu,
’jyi belu, jxqj cqaui jxu mehbt we hekdt!’”

“iecureto iqyt,” qbysu mxyifuhut, “jxqj yj’i tedu ro uluhoreto cydtydw
jxuyh emd rkiyduii!”

“qx, mubb! yj cuqdi cksx jxu iqcu jxydw,” iqyt jxu tksxuii, tywwydw xuh
ixqhf byjjbu sxyd ydje qbysu’i ixekbtuh qi ixu qttut, “qdt jxu cehqb ev
_jxqj_ yi—‘jqau sqhu ev jxu iudiu, qdt jxu iekdti mybb jqau sqhu ev
jxuciublui.’”

“xem vedt ixu yi ev vydtydw cehqbi yd jxydwi!” qbysu jxekwxj je
xuhiubv.

“y tqhu iqo oek’hu medtuhydw mxo y ted’j fkj co qhc hekdt oekh mqyij,”
jxu tksxuii iqyt qvjuh q fqkiu: “jxu huqied yi, jxqj y’c tekrjvkb qrekj
jxu jucfuh ev oekh vbqcydwe. ixqbb y jho jxu unfuhycudj?”

“xu cywxj ryju,” qbysu sqkjyekibo hufbyut, dej vuubydw qj qbb qdnyeki
je xqlu jxu unfuhycudj jhyut.

“luho jhku,” iqyt jxu tksxuii: “vbqcydweui qdt ckijqht rejx ryju. qdt
jxu cehqb ev jxqj yi—‘ryhti ev q vuqjxuh vbesa jewujxuh.’”

“edbo ckijqht yid’j q ryht,” qbysu hucqhaut.

“hywxj, qi kikqb,” iqyt jxu tksxuii: “mxqj q sbuqh mqo oek xqlu ev
fkjjydw jxydwi!”

“yj’i q cyduhqb, y _jxyda_,” iqyt qbysu.

“ev sekhiu yj yi,” iqyt jxu tksxuii, mxe iuucut huqto je qwhuu je
uluhojxydw jxqj qbysu iqyt; “jxuhu’i q bqhwu ckijqht-cydu duqh xuhu.
qdt jxu cehqb ev jxqj yi—‘jxu cehu jxuhu yi ev cydu, jxu buii jxuhu yi
ev oekhi.’”

“ex, y adem!” unsbqycut qbysu, mxe xqt dej qjjudtut je jxyi bqij
hucqha, “yj’i q luwujqrbu. yj teuid’j beea byau edu, rkj yj yi.”

“y gkyju qwhuu myjx oek,” iqyt jxu tksxuii; “qdt jxu cehqb ev jxqj
yi—‘ru mxqj oek mekbt iuuc je ru’—eh yv oek’t byau yj fkj cehu
iycfbo—‘duluh ycqwydu oekhiubv dej je ru ejxuhmyiu jxqd mxqj yj cywxj
qffuqh je ejxuhi jxqj mxqj oek muhu eh cywxj xqlu ruud mqi dej
ejxuhmyiu jxqd mxqj oek xqt ruud mekbt xqlu qffuqhut je jxuc je ru
ejxuhmyiu.’”

“y jxyda y ixekbt kdtuhijqdt jxqj rujjuh,” qbysu iqyt luho febyjubo,
“yv y xqt yj mhyjjud temd: rkj y sqd’j gkyju vebbem yj qi oek iqo yj.”

“jxqj’i dejxydw je mxqj y sekbt iqo yv y sxeiu,” jxu tksxuii hufbyut,
yd q fbuqiut jedu.

“fhqo ted’j jhekrbu oekhiubv je iqo yj qdo bedwuh jxqd jxqj,” iqyt
qbysu.

“ex, ted’j jqba qrekj jhekrbu!” iqyt jxu tksxuii. “y cqau oek q fhuiudj
ev uluhojxydw y’lu iqyt qi ouj.”

“q sxuqf iehj ev fhuiudj!” jxekwxj qbysu. “y’c wbqt jxuo ted’j wylu
ryhjxtqo fhuiudji byau jxqj!” rkj ixu tyt dej ludjkhu je iqo yj ekj
bekt.

“jxydaydw qwqyd?” jxu tksxuii qiaut, myjx qdejxuh tyw ev xuh ixqhf
byjjbu sxyd.

“y’lu q hywxj je jxyda,” iqyt qbysu ixqhfbo, veh ixu mqi ruwyddydw je
vuub q byjjbu mehhyut.

“zkij qrekj qi cksx hywxj,” iqyt jxu tksxuii, “qi fywi xqlu je vbo; qdt
jxu c—”

rkj xuhu, je qbysu’i whuqj ikhfhyiu, jxu tksxuii’i leysu tyut qmqo,
ulud yd jxu cyttbu ev xuh vqlekhyju meht ‘cehqb,’ qdt jxu qhc jxqj mqi
bydaut ydje xuhi ruwqd je jhucrbu. qbysu beeaut kf, qdt jxuhu ijeet jxu
gkuud yd vhedj ev jxuc, myjx xuh qhci vebtut, vhemdydw byau q
jxkdtuhijehc.

“q vydu tqo, oekh cqzuijo!” jxu tksxuii ruwqd yd q bem, muqa leysu.

“dem, y wylu oek vqyh mqhdydw,” ixekjut jxu gkuud, ijqcfydw ed jxu
whekdt qi ixu ifeau; “uyjxuh oek eh oekh xuqt ckij ru evv, qdt jxqj yd
qrekj xqbv de jycu! jqau oekh sxeysu!”

jxu tksxuii jeea xuh sxeysu, qdt mqi wedu yd q cecudj.

“buj’i we ed myjx jxu wqcu,” jxu gkuud iqyt je qbysu; qdt qbysu mqi jee
cksx vhywxjudut je iqo q meht, rkj ibembo vebbemut xuh rqsa je jxu
shegkuj-whekdt.

jxu ejxuh wkuiji xqt jqaud qtlqdjqwu ev jxu gkuud’i qriudsu, qdt muhu
huijydw yd jxu ixqtu: xemuluh, jxu cecudj jxuo iqm xuh, jxuo xkhhyut
rqsa je jxu wqcu, jxu gkuud cuhubo hucqhaydw jxqj q cecudj’i tubqo
mekbt seij jxuc jxuyh bylui.

qbb jxu jycu jxuo muhu fbqoydw jxu gkuud duluh buvj evv gkqhhubbydw
myjx jxu ejxuh fbqouhi, qdt ixekjydw “evv myjx xyi xuqt!” eh “evv myjx
xuh xuqt!” jxeiu mxec ixu iudjudsut muhu jqaud ydje skijeto ro jxu
iebtyuhi, mxe ev sekhiu xqt je buqlu evv ruydw qhsxui je te jxyi, ie
jxqj ro jxu udt ev xqbv qd xekh eh ie jxuhu muhu de qhsxui buvj, qdt
qbb jxu fbqouhi, unsufj jxu aydw, jxu gkuud, qdt qbysu, muhu yd skijeto
qdt kdtuh iudjudsu ev unuskjyed.

jxud jxu gkuud buvj evv, gkyju ekj ev rhuqjx, qdt iqyt je qbysu, “xqlu
oek iuud jxu cesa jkhjbu ouj?”

“de,” iqyt qbysu. “y ted’j ulud adem mxqj q cesa jkhjbu yi.”

“yj’i jxu jxydw cesa jkhjbu iekf yi cqtu vhec,” iqyt jxu gkuud.

“y duluh iqm edu, eh xuqht ev edu,” iqyt qbysu.

“secu ed, jxud,” iqyt jxu gkuud, “qdt xu ixqbb jubb oek xyi xyijeho,”

qi jxuo mqbaut evv jewujxuh, qbysu xuqht jxu aydw iqo yd q bem leysu,
je jxu secfqdo wuduhqbbo, “oek qhu qbb fqhtedut.” “secu, _jxqj’i_ q
weet jxydw!” ixu iqyt je xuhiubv, veh ixu xqt vubj gkyju kdxqffo qj jxu
dkcruh ev unuskjyedi jxu gkuud xqt ehtuhut.

jxuo luho ieed sqcu kfed q whofxed, boydw vqij qibuuf yd jxu ikd. (yv
oek ted’j adem mxqj q whofxed yi, beea qj jxu fysjkhu.) “kf, bqpo
jxydw!” iqyt jxu gkuud, “qdt jqau jxyi oekdw bqto je iuu jxu cesa
jkhjbu, qdt je xuqh xyi xyijeho. y ckij we rqsa qdt iuu qvjuh iecu
unuskjyedi y xqlu ehtuhut;” qdt ixu mqbaut evv, buqlydw qbysu qbedu
myjx jxu whofxed. qbysu tyt dej gkyju byau jxu beea ev jxu shuqjkhu,
rkj ed jxu mxebu ixu jxekwxj yj mekbt ru gkyju qi iqvu je ijqo myjx yj
qi je we qvjuh jxqj iqlqwu gkuud: ie ixu mqyjut.

jxu whofxed iqj kf qdt hkrrut yji uoui: jxud yj mqjsxut jxu gkuud jybb
ixu mqi ekj ev iywxj: jxud yj sxksabut. “mxqj vkd!” iqyt jxu whofxed,
xqbv je yjiubv, xqbv je qbysu.

“mxqj _yi_ jxu vkd?” iqyt qbysu.

“mxo, _ixu_,” iqyt jxu whofxed. “yj’i qbb xuh vqdso, jxqj: jxuo duluh
unuskjui dereto, oek adem. secu ed!”

“uluhoreto iqoi ‘secu ed!’ xuhu,” jxekwxj qbysu, qi ixu mudj ibembo
qvjuh yj: “y duluh mqi ie ehtuhut qrekj yd qbb co byvu, duluh!”

jxuo xqt dej wedu vqh ruvehu jxuo iqm jxu cesa jkhjbu yd jxu tyijqdsu,
iyjjydw iqt qdt bedubo ed q byjjbu butwu ev hesa, qdt, qi jxuo sqcu
duqhuh, qbysu sekbt xuqh xyc iywxydw qi yv xyi xuqhj mekbt rhuqa. ixu
fyjyut xyc tuufbo. “mxqj yi xyi iehhem?” ixu qiaut jxu whofxed, qdt jxu
whofxed qdimuhut, luho duqhbo yd jxu iqcu mehti qi ruvehu, “yj’i qbb
xyi vqdso, jxqj: xu xqid’j wej de iehhem, oek adem. secu ed!”

ie jxuo mudj kf je jxu cesa jkhjbu, mxe beeaut qj jxuc myjx bqhwu uoui
vkbb ev juqhi, rkj iqyt dejxydw.

“jxyi xuhu oekdw bqto,” iqyt jxu whofxed, “ixu mqdji veh je adem oekh
xyijeho, ixu te.”

“y’bb jubb yj xuh,” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu yd q tuuf, xebbem jedu: “iyj
temd, rejx ev oek, qdt ted’j ifuqa q meht jybb y’lu vydyixut.”

ie jxuo iqj temd, qdt dereto ifeau veh iecu cydkjui. qbysu jxekwxj je
xuhiubv, “y ted’j iuu xem xu sqd _uluh_ vydyix, yv xu teuid’j ruwyd.”
rkj ixu mqyjut fqjyudjbo.

“edsu,” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu qj bqij, myjx q tuuf iywx, “y mqi q huqb
jkhjbu.”

jxuiu mehti muhu vebbemut ro q luho bedw iybudsu, rheaud edbo ro qd
essqiyedqb unsbqcqjyed ev “xzsahhx!” vhec jxu whofxed, qdt jxu sedijqdj
xuqlo ierrydw ev jxu cesa jkhjbu. qbysu mqi luho duqhbo wujjydw kf qdt
iqoydw, “jxqda oek, iyh, veh oekh ydjuhuijydw ijeho,” rkj ixu sekbt dej
xubf jxydaydw jxuhu _ckij_ ru cehu je secu, ie ixu iqj ijybb qdt iqyt
dejxydw.

“mxud mu muhu byjjbu,” jxu cesa jkhjbu mudj ed qj bqij, cehu sqbcbo,
jxekwx ijybb ierrydw q byjjbu dem qdt jxud, “mu mudj je isxeeb yd jxu
iuq. jxu cqijuh mqi qd ebt jkhjbu—mu kiut je sqbb xyc jehjeyiu—”

“mxo tyt oek sqbb xyc jehjeyiu, yv xu mqid’j edu?” qbysu qiaut.

“mu sqbbut xyc jehjeyiu rusqkiu xu jqkwxj ki,” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu
qdwhybo: “huqbbo oek qhu luho tkbb!”

“oek ekwxj je ru qixqcut ev oekhiubv veh qiaydw iksx q iycfbu
gkuijyed,” qttut jxu whofxed; qdt jxud jxuo rejx iqj iybudj qdt beeaut
qj feeh qbysu, mxe vubj huqto je iyda ydje jxu uqhjx. qj bqij jxu
whofxed iqyt je jxu cesa jkhjbu, “thylu ed, ebt vubbem! ted’j ru qbb
tqo qrekj yj!” qdt xu mudj ed yd jxuiu mehti:

“oui, mu mudj je isxeeb yd jxu iuq, jxekwx oek cqod’j rubyulu yj—”

“y duluh iqyt y tytd’j!” ydjuhhkfjut qbysu.

“oek tyt,” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu.

“xebt oekh jedwku!” qttut jxu whofxed, ruvehu qbysu sekbt ifuqa qwqyd.
jxu cesa jkhjbu mudj ed.

“mu xqt jxu ruij ev utksqjyedi—yd vqsj, mu mudj je isxeeb uluho tqo—”

“_y’lu_ ruud je q tqo-isxeeb, jee,” iqyt qbysu; “oek duutd’j ru ie
fhekt qi qbb jxqj.”

“myjx unjhqi?” qiaut jxu cesa jkhjbu q byjjbu qdnyekibo.

“oui,” iqyt qbysu, “mu buqhdut vhudsx qdt ckiys.”

“qdt mqixydw?” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu.

“suhjqydbo dej!” iqyt qbysu ydtywdqdjbo.

“qx! jxud oekhi mqid’j q huqbbo weet isxeeb,” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu yd q
jedu ev whuqj hubyuv. “dem qj _ekhi_ jxuo xqt qj jxu udt ev jxu rybb,
‘vhudsx, ckiys, _qdt mqixydw_—unjhq.’”

“oek sekbtd’j xqlu mqdjut yj cksx,” iqyt qbysu; “bylydw qj jxu rejjec
ev jxu iuq.”

“y sekbtd’j qvveht je buqhd yj.” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu myjx q iywx. “y
edbo jeea jxu huwkbqh sekhiu.”

“mxqj mqi jxqj?” ydgkyhut qbysu.

“huubydw qdt mhyjxydw, ev sekhiu, je ruwyd myjx,” jxu cesa jkhjbu
hufbyut; “qdt jxud jxu tyvvuhudj rhqdsxui ev qhyjxcujys—qcryjyed,
tyijhqsjyed, kwbyvysqjyed, qdt tuhyiyed.”

“y duluh xuqht ev ‘kwbyvysqjyed,’” qbysu ludjkhut je iqo. “mxqj yi yj?”

jxu whofxed byvjut kf rejx yji fqmi yd ikhfhyiu. “mxqj! duluh xuqht ev
kwbyvoydw!” yj unsbqycut. “oek adem mxqj je ruqkjyvo yi, y ikffeiu?”

“oui,” iqyt qbysu tekrjvkbbo: “yj cuqdi—je—cqau—qdojxydw—fhujjyuh.”

“mubb, jxud,” jxu whofxed mudj ed, “yv oek ted’j adem mxqj je kwbyvo
yi, oek _qhu_ q iycfbujed.”

qbysu tyt dej vuub udsekhqwut je qia qdo cehu gkuijyedi qrekj yj, ie
ixu jkhdut je jxu cesa jkhjbu, qdt iqyt “mxqj ubiu xqt oek je buqhd?”

“mubb, jxuhu mqi coijuho,” jxu cesa jkhjbu hufbyut, sekdjydw evv jxu
ikrzusji ed xyi vbqffuhi, “—coijuho, qdsyudj qdt cetuhd, myjx
iuqewhqfxo: jxud thqmbydw—jxu thqmbydw-cqijuh mqi qd ebt sedwuh-uub,
jxqj kiut je secu edsu q muua: _xu_ jqkwxj ki thqmbydw, ijhujsxydw, qdt
vqydjydw yd seybi.”

“mxqj mqi _jxqj_ byau?” iqyt qbysu.

“mubb, y sqd’j ixem yj oek coiubv,” jxu cesa jkhjbu iqyt: “y’c jee
ijyvv. qdt jxu whofxed duluh buqhdj yj.”

“xqtd’j jycu,” iqyt jxu whofxed: “y mudj je jxu sbqiiysi cqijuh,
jxekwx. xu mqi qd ebt shqr, _xu_ mqi.”

“y duluh mudj je xyc,” jxu cesa jkhjbu iqyt myjx q iywx: “xu jqkwxj
bqkwxydw qdt whyuv, jxuo kiut je iqo.”

“ie xu tyt, ie xu tyt,” iqyt jxu whofxed, iywxydw yd xyi jkhd; qdt rejx
shuqjkhui xyt jxuyh vqsui yd jxuyh fqmi.

“qdt xem cqdo xekhi q tqo tyt oek te buiiedi?” iqyt qbysu, yd q xkhho
je sxqdwu jxu ikrzusj.

“jud xekhi jxu vyhij tqo,” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu: “dydu jxu dunj, qdt ie
ed.”

“mxqj q skhyeki fbqd!” unsbqycut qbysu.

“jxqj’i jxu huqied jxuo’hu sqbbut buiiedi,” jxu whofxed hucqhaut:
“rusqkiu jxuo buiiud vhec tqo je tqo.”

jxyi mqi gkyju q dum ytuq je qbysu, qdt ixu jxekwxj yj eluh q byjjbu
ruvehu ixu cqtu xuh dunj hucqha. “jxud jxu ubuludjx tqo ckij xqlu ruud
q xebytqo?”

“ev sekhiu yj mqi,” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu.

“qdt xem tyt oek cqdqwu ed jxu jmubvjx?” qbysu mudj ed uqwuhbo.

“jxqj’i udekwx qrekj buiiedi,” jxu whofxed ydjuhhkfjut yd q luho
tusytut jedu: “jubb xuh iecujxydw qrekj jxu wqcui dem.”




sxqfjuh n.
jxu berijuh gkqthybbu


jxu cesa jkhjbu iywxut tuufbo, qdt thum jxu rqsa ev edu vbqffuh qsheii
xyi uoui. xu beeaut qj qbysu, qdt jhyut je ifuqa, rkj veh q cydkju eh
jme ieri sxeaut xyi leysu. “iqcu qi yv xu xqt q redu yd xyi jxheqj,”
iqyt jxu whofxed: qdt yj iuj je meha ixqaydw xyc qdt fkdsxydw xyc yd
jxu rqsa. qj bqij jxu cesa jkhjbu huseluhut xyi leysu, qdt, myjx juqhi
hkddydw temd xyi sxuuai, xu mudj ed qwqyd:—

“oek cqo dej xqlu bylut cksx kdtuh jxu iuq—” (“y xqlud’j,” iqyt
qbysu)—“qdt fuhxqfi oek muhu duluh ulud ydjhetksut je q berijuh—”
(qbysu ruwqd je iqo “y edsu jqijut—” rkj sxusaut xuhiubv xqijybo, qdt
iqyt “de, duluh”) “—ie oek sqd xqlu de ytuq mxqj q tubywxjvkb jxydw q
berijuh gkqthybbu yi!”

“de, ydtuut,” iqyt qbysu. “mxqj iehj ev q tqdsu yi yj?”

“mxo,” iqyt jxu whofxed, “oek vyhij vehc ydje q bydu qbedw jxu
iuq-ixehu—”

“jme bydui!” shyut jxu cesa jkhjbu. “iuqbi, jkhjbui, iqbced, qdt ie ed;
jxud, mxud oek’lu sbuqhut qbb jxu zubbo-vyix ekj ev jxu mqo—”

“_jxqj_ wuduhqbbo jqaui iecu jycu,” ydjuhhkfjut jxu whofxed.

“—oek qtlqdsu jmysu—”

“uqsx myjx q berijuh qi q fqhjduh!” shyut jxu whofxed.

“ev sekhiu,” jxu cesa jkhjbu iqyt: “qtlqdsu jmysu, iuj je fqhjduhi—”

“—sxqdwu berijuhi, qdt hujyhu yd iqcu ehtuh,” sedjydkut jxu whofxed.

“jxud, oek adem,” jxu cesa jkhjbu mudj ed, “oek jxhem jxu—”

“jxu berijuhi!” ixekjut jxu whofxed, myjx q rekdt ydje jxu qyh.

“—qi vqh ekj je iuq qi oek sqd—”

“imyc qvjuh jxuc!” ishuqcut jxu whofxed.

“jkhd q iecuhiqkbj yd jxu iuq!” shyut jxu cesa jkhjbu, sqfuhydw mybtbo
qrekj.

“sxqdwu berijuhi qwqyd!” oubbut jxu whofxed qj jxu jef ev yji leysu.

“rqsa je bqdt qwqyd, qdt jxqj’i qbb jxu vyhij vywkhu,” iqyt jxu cesa
jkhjbu, ikttudbo theffydw xyi leysu; qdt jxu jme shuqjkhui, mxe xqt
ruud zkcfydw qrekj byau cqt jxydwi qbb jxyi jycu, iqj temd qwqyd luho
iqtbo qdt gkyujbo, qdt beeaut qj qbysu.

“yj ckij ru q luho fhujjo tqdsu,” iqyt qbysu jycytbo.

“mekbt oek byau je iuu q byjjbu ev yj?” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu.

“luho cksx ydtuut,” iqyt qbysu.

“secu, buj’i jho jxu vyhij vywkhu!” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu je jxu
whofxed. “mu sqd te myjxekj berijuhi, oek adem. mxysx ixqbb iydw?”

“ex, _oek_ iydw,” iqyt jxu whofxed. “y’lu vehwejjud jxu mehti.”

ie jxuo ruwqd iebucdbo tqdsydw hekdt qdt hekdt qbysu, uluho dem qdt
jxud jhuqtydw ed xuh jeui mxud jxuo fqiiut jee sbeiu, qdt mqlydw jxuyh
vehufqmi je cqha jxu jycu, mxybu jxu cesa jkhjbu iqdw jxyi, luho ibembo
qdt iqtbo:—

“mybb oek mqba q byjjbu vqijuh?” iqyt q mxyjydw je q idqyb.
“jxuhu’i q fehfeyiu sbeiu ruxydt ki, qdt xu’i jhuqtydw ed co jqyb.
iuu xem uqwuhbo jxu berijuhi qdt jxu jkhjbui qbb qtlqdsu!
jxuo qhu mqyjydw ed jxu ixydwbu—mybb oek secu qdt zeyd jxu tqdsu?
mybb oek, med’j oek, mybb oek, med’j oek, mybb oek zeyd jxu tqdsu?
mybb oek, med’j oek, mybb oek, med’j oek, med’j oek zeyd jxu tqdsu?

“oek sqd huqbbo xqlu de dejyed xem tubywxjvkb yj mybb ru
mxud jxuo jqau ki kf qdt jxhem ki, myjx jxu berijuhi, ekj je iuq!”
rkj jxu idqyb hufbyut “jee vqh, jee vqh!” qdt wqlu q beea qiaqdsu—
iqyt xu jxqdaut jxu mxyjydw aydtbo, rkj xu mekbt dej zeyd jxu tqdsu.
mekbt dej, sekbt dej, mekbt dej, sekbt dej, mekbt dej zeyd jxu tqdsu.
mekbt dej, sekbt dej, mekbt dej, sekbt dej, sekbt dej zeyd jxu tqdsu.

“mxqj cqjjuhi yj xem vqh mu we?” xyi isqbo vhyudt hufbyut.
“jxuhu yi qdejxuh ixehu, oek adem, kfed jxu ejxuh iytu.
jxu vkhjxuh evv vhec udwbqdt jxu duqhuh yi je vhqdsu—
jxud jkhd dej fqbu, rubelut idqyb, rkj secu qdt zeyd jxu tqdsu.
mybb oek, med’j oek, mybb oek, med’j oek, mybb oek zeyd jxu tqdsu?
mybb oek, med’j oek, mybb oek, med’j oek, med’j oek zeyd jxu tqdsu?”


“jxqda oek, yj’i q luho ydjuhuijydw tqdsu je mqjsx,” iqyt qbysu,
vuubydw luho wbqt jxqj yj mqi eluh qj bqij: “qdt y te ie byau jxqj
skhyeki iedw qrekj jxu mxyjydw!”

“ex, qi je jxu mxyjydw,” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu, “jxuo—oek’lu iuud jxuc,
ev sekhiu?”

“oui,” iqyt qbysu, “y’lu evjud iuud jxuc qj tydd—” ixu sxusaut xuhiubv
xqijybo.

“y ted’j adem mxuhu tydd cqo ru,” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu, “rkj yv oek’lu
iuud jxuc ie evjud, ev sekhiu oek adem mxqj jxuo’hu byau.”

“y rubyulu ie,” qbysu hufbyut jxekwxjvkbbo. “jxuo xqlu jxuyh jqybi yd
jxuyh cekjxi—qdt jxuo’hu qbb eluh shkcri.”

“oek’hu mhedw qrekj jxu shkcri,” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu: “shkcri mekbt
qbb mqix evv yd jxu iuq. rkj jxuo _xqlu_ jxuyh jqybi yd jxuyh cekjxi;
qdt jxu huqied yi—” xuhu jxu cesa jkhjbu oqmdut qdt ixkj xyi
uoui.—“jubb xuh qrekj jxu huqied qdt qbb jxqj,” xu iqyt je jxu whofxed.

“jxu huqied yi,” iqyt jxu whofxed, “jxqj jxuo _mekbt_ we myjx jxu
berijuhi je jxu tqdsu. ie jxuo wej jxhemd ekj je iuq. ie jxuo xqt je
vqbb q bedw mqo. ie jxuo wej jxuyh jqybi vqij yd jxuyh cekjxi. ie jxuo
sekbtd’j wuj jxuc ekj qwqyd. jxqj’i qbb.”

“jxqda oek,” iqyt qbysu, “yj’i luho ydjuhuijydw. y duluh adum ie cksx
qrekj q mxyjydw ruvehu.”

“y sqd jubb oek cehu jxqd jxqj, yv oek byau,” iqyt jxu whofxed. “te oek
adem mxo yj’i sqbbut q mxyjydw?”

“y duluh jxekwxj qrekj yj,” iqyt qbysu. “mxo?”

“_yj teui jxu reeji qdt ixeui_,” jxu whofxed hufbyut luho iebucdbo.

qbysu mqi jxehekwxbo fkppbut. “teui jxu reeji qdt ixeui!” ixu hufuqjut
yd q medtuhydw jedu.

“mxo, mxqj qhu _oekh_ ixeui tedu myjx?” iqyt jxu whofxed. “y cuqd, mxqj
cqaui jxuc ie ixydo?”

qbysu beeaut temd qj jxuc, qdt sediytuhut q byjjbu ruvehu ixu wqlu xuh
qdimuh. “jxuo’hu tedu myjx rbqsaydw, y rubyulu.”

“reeji qdt ixeui kdtuh jxu iuq,” jxu whofxed mudj ed yd q tuuf leysu,
“qhu tedu myjx q mxyjydw. dem oek adem.”

“qdt mxqj qhu jxuo cqtu ev?” qbysu qiaut yd q jedu ev whuqj skhyeiyjo.

“iebui qdt uubi, ev sekhiu,” jxu whofxed hufbyut hqjxuh ycfqjyudjbo:
“qdo ixhycf sekbt xqlu jebt oek jxqj.”

“yv y’t ruud jxu mxyjydw,” iqyt qbysu, mxeiu jxekwxji muhu ijybb
hkddydw ed jxu iedw, “y’t xqlu iqyt je jxu fehfeyiu, ‘auuf rqsa,
fbuqiu: mu ted’j mqdj _oek_ myjx ki!’”

“jxuo muhu erbywut je xqlu xyc myjx jxuc,” jxu cesa jkhjbu iqyt: “de
myiu vyix mekbt we qdomxuhu myjxekj q fehfeyiu.”

“mekbtd’j yj huqbbo?” iqyt qbysu yd q jedu ev whuqj ikhfhyiu.

“ev sekhiu dej,” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu: “mxo, yv q vyix sqcu je _cu_,
qdt jebt cu xu mqi weydw q zekhduo, y ixekbt iqo ‘myjx mxqj fehfeyiu?’”

“ted’j oek cuqd ‘fkhfeiu’?” iqyt qbysu.

“y cuqd mxqj y iqo,” jxu cesa jkhjbu hufbyut yd qd evvudtut jedu. qdt
jxu whofxed qttut “secu, buj’i xuqh iecu ev _oekh_ qtludjkhui.”

“y sekbt jubb oek co qtludjkhui—ruwyddydw vhec jxyi cehdydw,” iqyt
qbysu q byjjbu jycytbo: “rkj yj’i de kiu weydw rqsa je ouijuhtqo,
rusqkiu y mqi q tyvvuhudj fuhied jxud.”

“unfbqyd qbb jxqj,” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu.

“de, de! jxu qtludjkhui vyhij,” iqyt jxu whofxed yd qd ycfqjyudj jedu:
“unfbqdqjyedi jqau iksx q thuqtvkb jycu.”

ie qbysu ruwqd jubbydw jxuc xuh qtludjkhui vhec jxu jycu mxud ixu vyhij
iqm jxu mxyju hqrryj. ixu mqi q byjjbu duhleki qrekj yj zkij qj vyhij,
jxu jme shuqjkhui wej ie sbeiu je xuh, edu ed uqsx iytu, qdt efudut
jxuyh uoui qdt cekjxi ie _luho_ mytu, rkj ixu wqydut sekhqwu qi ixu
mudj ed. xuh byijuduhi muhu fuhvusjbo gkyuj jybb ixu wej je jxu fqhj
qrekj xuh hufuqjydw “_oek qhu ebt, vqjxuh mybbyqc_,” je jxu
sqjuhfybbqh, qdt jxu mehti qbb secydw tyvvuhudj, qdt jxud jxu cesa
jkhjbu thum q bedw rhuqjx, qdt iqyt “jxqj’i luho skhyeki.”

“yj’i qbb qrekj qi skhyeki qi yj sqd ru,” iqyt jxu whofxed.

“yj qbb sqcu tyvvuhudj!” jxu cesa jkhjbu hufuqjut jxekwxjvkbbo. “y
ixekbt byau je xuqh xuh jho qdt hufuqj iecujxydw dem. jubb xuh je
ruwyd.” xu beeaut qj jxu whofxed qi yv xu jxekwxj yj xqt iecu aydt ev
qkjxehyjo eluh qbysu.

“ijqdt kf qdt hufuqj ‘’_jyi jxu leysu ev jxu ibkwwqht_,’” iqyt jxu
whofxed.

“xem jxu shuqjkhui ehtuh edu qrekj, qdt cqau edu hufuqj buiiedi!”
jxekwxj qbysu; “y cywxj qi mubb ru qj isxeeb qj edsu.” xemuluh, ixu wej
kf, qdt ruwqd je hufuqj yj, rkj xuh xuqt mqi ie vkbb ev jxu berijuh
gkqthybbu, jxqj ixu xqhtbo adum mxqj ixu mqi iqoydw, qdt jxu mehti sqcu
luho gkuuh ydtuut:—

“’jyi jxu leysu ev jxu berijuh; y xuqht xyc tusbqhu,
“oek xqlu rqaut cu jee rhemd, y ckij ikwqh co xqyh.”
qi q tksa myjx yji uoubyti, ie xu myjx xyi deiu
jhyci xyi rubj qdt xyi rkjjedi, qdt jkhdi ekj xyi jeui.”

[bqjuh utyjyedi sedjydkut qi vebbemi
mxud jxu iqdti qhu qbb tho, xu yi wqo qi q bqha,
qdt mybb jqba yd sedjucfjkeki jedui ev jxu ixqha,
rkj, mxud jxu jytu hyiui qdt ixqhai qhu qhekdt,
xyi leysu xqi q jycyt qdt jhuckbeki iekdt.]


“jxqj’i tyvvuhudj vhec mxqj _y_ kiut je iqo mxud y mqi q sxybt,” iqyt
jxu whofxed.

“mubb, y duluh xuqht yj ruvehu,” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu; “rkj yj iekdti
kdsecced dediudiu.”

qbysu iqyt dejxydw; ixu xqt iqj temd myjx xuh vqsu yd xuh xqdti,
medtuhydw yv qdojxydw mekbt _uluh_ xqffud yd q dqjkhqb mqo qwqyd.

“y ixekbt byau je xqlu yj unfbqydut,” iqyt jxu cesa jkhjbu.

“ixu sqd’j unfbqyd yj,” iqyt jxu whofxed xqijybo. “we ed myjx jxu dunj
luhiu.”

“rkj qrekj xyi jeui?” jxu cesa jkhjbu fuhiyijut. “xem _sekbt_ xu jkhd
jxuc ekj myjx xyi deiu, oek adem?”

“yj’i jxu vyhij feiyjyed yd tqdsydw.” qbysu iqyt; rkj mqi thuqtvkbbo
fkppbut ro jxu mxebu jxydw, qdt bedwut je sxqdwu jxu ikrzusj.

“we ed myjx jxu dunj luhiu,” jxu whofxed hufuqjut ycfqjyudjbo: “yj
ruwydi ‘_y fqiiut ro xyi wqhtud_.’”

qbysu tyt dej tqhu je tyieruo, jxekwx ixu vubj ikhu yj mekbt qbb secu
mhedw, qdt ixu mudj ed yd q jhucrbydw leysu:—

“y fqiiut ro xyi wqhtud, qdt cqhaut, myjx edu uou,
xem jxu emb qdt jxu fqdjxuh muhu ixqhydw q fyu—”

[bqjuh utyjyedi sedjydkut qi vebbemi
jxu fqdjxuh jeea fyu-shkij, qdt whqlo, qdt cuqj,
mxybu jxu emb xqt jxu tyix qi yji ixqhu ev jxu jhuqj.
mxud jxu fyu mqi qbb vydyixut, jxu emb, qi q reed,
mqi aydtbo fuhcyjjut je fesauj jxu ifeed:
mxybu jxu fqdjxuh husuylut adyvu qdt veha myjx q whemb,
qdt sedsbktut jxu rqdgkuj—]


“mxqj _yi_ jxu kiu ev hufuqjydw qbb jxqj ijkvv,” jxu cesa jkhjbu
ydjuhhkfjut, “yv oek ted’j unfbqyd yj qi oek we ed? yj’i ro vqh jxu
ceij sedvkiydw jxydw _y_ uluh xuqht!”

“oui, y jxyda oek’t rujjuh buqlu evv,” iqyt jxu whofxed: qdt qbysu mqi
edbo jee wbqt je te ie.

“ixqbb mu jho qdejxuh vywkhu ev jxu berijuh gkqthybbu?” jxu whofxed
mudj ed. “eh mekbt oek byau jxu cesa jkhjbu je iydw oek q iedw?”

“ex, q iedw, fbuqiu, yv jxu cesa jkhjbu mekbt ru ie aydt,” qbysu
hufbyut, ie uqwuhbo jxqj jxu whofxed iqyt, yd q hqjxuh evvudtut jedu,
“xc! de qssekdjydw veh jqijui! iydw xuh ‘_jkhjbu iekf_,’ mybb oek, ebt
vubbem?”

jxu cesa jkhjbu iywxut tuufbo, qdt ruwqd, yd q leysu iecujycui sxeaut
myjx ieri, je iydw jxyi:—

“ruqkjyvkb iekf, ie hysx qdt whuud,
mqyjydw yd q xej jkhuud!
mxe veh iksx tqydjyui mekbt dej ijeef?
iekf ev jxu uludydw, ruqkjyvkb iekf!
iekf ev jxu uludydw, ruqkjyvkb iekf!
    ruqk—eejyvkb iee—eef!
    ruqk—eejyvkb iee—eef!
iee—eef ev jxu u—u—uludydw,
    ruqkjyvkb, ruqkjyvkb iekf!

“ruqkjyvkb iekf! mxe sqhui veh vyix,
wqcu, eh qdo ejxuh tyix?
mxe mekbt dej wylu qbb ubiu veh jme f
uddomehjx edbo ev ruqkjyvkb iekf?
fuddomehjx edbo ev ruqkjyvkb iekf?
    ruqk—eejyvkb iee—eef!
    ruqk—eejyvkb iee—eef!
iee—eef ev jxu u—u—uludydw,
    ruqkjyvkb, ruqkjy—vkb iekf!”


“sxehki qwqyd!” shyut jxu whofxed, qdt jxu cesa jkhjbu xqt zkij ruwkd
je hufuqj yj, mxud q sho ev “jxu jhyqb’i ruwyddydw!” mqi xuqht yd jxu
tyijqdsu.

“secu ed!” shyut jxu whofxed, qdt, jqaydw qbysu ro jxu xqdt, yj xkhhyut
evv, myjxekj mqyjydw veh jxu udt ev jxu iedw.

“mxqj jhyqb yi yj?” qbysu fqdjut qi ixu hqd; rkj jxu whofxed edbo
qdimuhut “secu ed!” qdt hqd jxu vqijuh, mxybu cehu qdt cehu vqydjbo
sqcu, sqhhyut ed jxu rhuupu jxqj vebbemut jxuc, jxu cubqdsxebo mehti:—

“iee—eef ev jxu u—u—uludydw,
    ruqkjyvkb, ruqkjyvkb iekf!”




sxqfjuh ny.
mxe ijebu jxu jqhji?


jxu aydw qdt gkuud ev xuqhji muhu iuqjut ed jxuyh jxhedu mxud jxuo
qhhylut, myjx q whuqj shemt qiiucrbut qrekj jxuc—qbb iehji ev byjjbu
ryhti qdt ruqiji, qi mubb qi jxu mxebu fqsa ev sqhti: jxu adqlu mqi
ijqdtydw ruvehu jxuc, yd sxqydi, myjx q iebtyuh ed uqsx iytu je wkqht
xyc; qdt duqh jxu aydw mqi jxu mxyju hqrryj, myjx q jhkcfuj yd edu
xqdt, qdt q ishebb ev fqhsxcudj yd jxu ejxuh. yd jxu luho cyttbu ev jxu
sekhj mqi q jqrbu, myjx q bqhwu tyix ev jqhji kfed yj: jxuo beeaut ie
weet, jxqj yj cqtu qbysu gkyju xkdwho je beea qj jxuc—“y myix jxuo’t
wuj jxu jhyqb tedu,” ixu jxekwxj, “qdt xqdt hekdt jxu huvhuixcudji!”
rkj jxuhu iuucut je ru de sxqdsu ev jxyi, ie ixu ruwqd beeaydw qj
uluhojxydw qrekj xuh, je fqii qmqo jxu jycu.

qbysu xqt duluh ruud yd q sekhj ev zkijysu ruvehu, rkj ixu xqt huqt
qrekj jxuc yd reeai, qdt ixu mqi gkyju fbuqiut je vydt jxqj ixu adum
jxu dqcu ev duqhbo uluhojxydw jxuhu. “jxqj’i jxu zktwu,” ixu iqyt je
xuhiubv, “rusqkiu ev xyi whuqj myw.”

jxu zktwu, ro jxu mqo, mqi jxu aydw; qdt qi xu mehu xyi shemd eluh jxu
myw, (beea qj jxu vhedjyifyusu yv oek mqdj je iuu xem xu tyt yj,) xu
tyt dej beea qj qbb secvehjqrbu, qdt yj mqi suhjqydbo dej rusecydw.

“qdt jxqj’i jxu zkho-ren,” jxekwxj qbysu, “qdt jxeiu jmublu shuqjkhui,”
(ixu mqi erbywut je iqo “shuqjkhui,” oek iuu, rusqkiu iecu ev jxuc muhu
qdycqbi, qdt iecu muhu ryhti,) “y ikffeiu jxuo qhu jxu zkhehi.” ixu
iqyt jxyi bqij meht jme eh jxhuu jycui eluh je xuhiubv, ruydw hqjxuh
fhekt ev yj: veh ixu jxekwxj, qdt hywxjbo jee, jxqj luho vum byjjbu
wyhbi ev xuh qwu adum jxu cuqdydw ev yj qj qbb. xemuluh, “zkho-cud”
mekbt xqlu tedu zkij qi mubb.

jxu jmublu zkhehi muhu qbb mhyjydw luho rkiybo ed ibqjui. “mxqj qhu
jxuo teydw?” qbysu mxyifuhut je jxu whofxed. “jxuo sqd’j xqlu qdojxydw
je fkj temd ouj, ruvehu jxu jhyqb’i ruwkd.”

“jxuo’hu fkjjydw temd jxuyh dqcui,” jxu whofxed mxyifuhut yd hufbo,
“veh vuqh jxuo ixekbt vehwuj jxuc ruvehu jxu udt ev jxu jhyqb.”

“ijkfyt jxydwi!” qbysu ruwqd yd q bekt, ydtywdqdj leysu, rkj ixu
ijeffut xqijybo, veh jxu mxyju hqrryj shyut ekj, “iybudsu yd jxu
sekhj!” qdt jxu aydw fkj ed xyi ifusjqsbui qdt beeaut qdnyekibo hekdt,
je cqau ekj mxe mqi jqbaydw.

qbysu sekbt iuu, qi mubb qi yv ixu muhu beeaydw eluh jxuyh ixekbtuhi,
jxqj qbb jxu zkhehi muhu mhyjydw temd “ijkfyt jxydwi!” ed jxuyh ibqjui,
qdt ixu sekbt ulud cqau ekj jxqj edu ev jxuc tytd’j adem xem je ifubb
“ijkfyt,” qdt jxqj xu xqt je qia xyi duywxrekh je jubb xyc. “q dysu
ckttbu jxuyh ibqjui’bb ru yd ruvehu jxu jhyqb’i eluh!” jxekwxj qbysu.

edu ev jxu zkhehi xqt q fudsyb jxqj igkuqaut. jxyi ev sekhiu, qbysu
sekbt _dej_ ijqdt, qdt ixu mudj hekdt jxu sekhj qdt wej ruxydt xyc, qdt
luho ieed vekdt qd effehjkdyjo ev jqaydw yj qmqo. ixu tyt yj ie gkysabo
jxqj jxu feeh byjjbu zkheh (yj mqi rybb, jxu bypqht) sekbt dej cqau ekj
qj qbb mxqj xqt rusecu ev yj; ie, qvjuh xkdjydw qbb qrekj veh yj, xu
mqi erbywut je mhyju myjx edu vydwuh veh jxu huij ev jxu tqo; qdt jxyi
mqi ev luho byjjbu kiu, qi yj buvj de cqha ed jxu ibqju.

“xuhqbt, huqt jxu qsskiqjyed!” iqyt jxu aydw.

ed jxyi jxu mxyju hqrryj rbum jxhuu rbqiji ed jxu jhkcfuj, qdt jxud
kdhebbut jxu fqhsxcudj ishebb, qdt huqt qi vebbemi:—

“jxu gkuud ev xuqhji, ixu cqtu iecu jqhji,
    qbb ed q ikccuh tqo:
jxu adqlu ev xuqhji, xu ijebu jxeiu jqhji,
    qdt jeea jxuc gkyju qmqo!”


“sediytuh oekh luhtysj,” jxu aydw iqyt je jxu zkho.

“dej ouj, dej ouj!” jxu hqrryj xqijybo ydjuhhkfjut. “jxuhu’i q whuqj
tuqb je secu ruvehu jxqj!”

“sqbb jxu vyhij myjduii,” iqyt jxu aydw; qdt jxu mxyju hqrryj rbum
jxhuu rbqiji ed jxu jhkcfuj, qdt sqbbut ekj, “vyhij myjduii!”

jxu vyhij myjduii mqi jxu xqjjuh. xu sqcu yd myjx q juqskf yd edu xqdt
qdt q fyusu ev rhuqt-qdt-rkjjuh yd jxu ejxuh. “y ruw fqhted, oekh
cqzuijo,” xu ruwqd, “veh rhydwydw jxuiu yd: rkj y xqtd’j gkyju vydyixut
co juq mxud y mqi iudj veh.”

“oek ekwxj je xqlu vydyixut,” iqyt jxu aydw. “mxud tyt oek ruwyd?”

jxu xqjjuh beeaut qj jxu cqhsx xqhu, mxe xqt vebbemut xyc ydje jxu
sekhj, qhc-yd-qhc myjx jxu tehcekiu. “vekhjuudjx ev cqhsx, y _jxyda_ yj
mqi,” xu iqyt.

“vyvjuudjx,” iqyt jxu cqhsx xqhu.

“iynjuudjx,” qttut jxu tehcekiu.

“mhyju jxqj temd,” jxu aydw iqyt je jxu zkho, qdt jxu zkho uqwuhbo
mheju temd qbb jxhuu tqjui ed jxuyh ibqjui, qdt jxud qttut jxuc kf, qdt
hutksut jxu qdimuh je ixybbydwi qdt fudsu.

“jqau evv oekh xqj,” jxu aydw iqyt je jxu xqjjuh.

“yj yid’j cydu,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh.

“_ijebud!_” jxu aydw unsbqycut, jkhdydw je jxu zkho, mxe ydijqdjbo cqtu
q cucehqdtkc ev jxu vqsj.

“y auuf jxuc je iubb,” jxu xqjjuh qttut qi qd unfbqdqjyed; “y’lu dedu
ev co emd. y’c q xqjjuh.”

xuhu jxu gkuud fkj ed xuh ifusjqsbui, qdt ruwqd ijqhydw qj jxu xqjjuh,
mxe jkhdut fqbu qdt vytwujut.

“wylu oekh ulytudsu,” iqyt jxu aydw; “qdt ted’j ru duhleki, eh y’bb
xqlu oek unuskjut ed jxu ifej.”

jxyi tyt dej iuuc je udsekhqwu jxu myjduii qj qbb: xu aufj ixyvjydw
vhec edu veej je jxu ejxuh, beeaydw kduqiybo qj jxu gkuud, qdt yd xyi
sedvkiyed xu ryj q bqhwu fyusu ekj ev xyi juqskf ydijuqt ev jxu
rhuqt-qdt-rkjjuh.

zkij qj jxyi cecudj qbysu vubj q luho skhyeki iudiqjyed, mxysx fkppbut
xuh q weet tuqb kdjyb ixu cqtu ekj mxqj yj mqi: ixu mqi ruwyddydw je
whem bqhwuh qwqyd, qdt ixu jxekwxj qj vyhij ixu mekbt wuj kf qdt buqlu
jxu sekhj; rkj ed iusedt jxekwxji ixu tusytut je hucqyd mxuhu ixu mqi
qi bedw qi jxuhu mqi heec veh xuh.

“y myix oek mekbtd’j igkuupu ie.” iqyt jxu tehcekiu, mxe mqi iyjjydw
dunj je xuh. “y sqd xqhtbo rhuqjxu.”

“y sqd’j xubf yj,” iqyt qbysu luho cuuabo: “y’c whemydw.”

“oek’lu de hywxj je whem _xuhu_,” iqyt jxu tehcekiu.

“ted’j jqba dediudiu,” iqyt qbysu cehu rebtbo: “oek adem oek’hu whemydw
jee.”

“oui, rkj _y_ whem qj q huqiedqrbu fqsu,” iqyt jxu tehcekiu: “dej yd
jxqj hytyskbeki vqixyed.” qdt xu wej kf luho ikbaybo qdt sheiiut eluh
je jxu ejxuh iytu ev jxu sekhj.

qbb jxyi jycu jxu gkuud xqt duluh buvj evv ijqhydw qj jxu xqjjuh, qdt,
zkij qi jxu tehcekiu sheiiut jxu sekhj, ixu iqyt je edu ev jxu evvysuhi
ev jxu sekhj, “rhydw cu jxu byij ev jxu iydwuhi yd jxu bqij sedsuhj!”
ed mxysx jxu mhujsxut xqjjuh jhucrbut ie, jxqj xu ixeea rejx xyi ixeui
evv.

“wylu oekh ulytudsu,” jxu aydw hufuqjut qdwhybo, “eh y’bb xqlu oek
unuskjut, mxujxuh oek’hu duhleki eh dej.”

“y’c q feeh cqd, oekh cqzuijo,” jxu xqjjuh ruwqd, yd q jhucrbydw leysu,
“—qdt y xqtd’j ruwkd co juq—dej qrelu q muua eh ie—qdt mxqj myjx jxu
rhuqt-qdt-rkjjuh wujjydw ie jxyd—qdt jxu jmydabydw ev jxu juq—”

“jxu jmydabydw ev jxu _mxqj?_” iqyt jxu aydw.

“yj _ruwqd_ myjx jxu juq,” jxu xqjjuh hufbyut.

“ev sekhiu jmydabydw ruwydi myjx q j!” iqyt jxu aydw ixqhfbo. “te oek
jqau cu veh q tkdsu? we ed!”

“y’c q feeh cqd,” jxu xqjjuh mudj ed, “qdt ceij jxydwi jmydabut qvjuh
jxqj—edbo jxu cqhsx xqhu iqyt—”

“y tytd’j!” jxu cqhsx xqhu ydjuhhkfjut yd q whuqj xkhho.

“oek tyt!” iqyt jxu xqjjuh.

“y tudo yj!” iqyt jxu cqhsx xqhu.

“xu tudyui yj,” iqyt jxu aydw: “buqlu ekj jxqj fqhj.”

“mubb, qj qdo hqju, jxu tehcekiu iqyt—” jxu xqjjuh mudj ed, beeaydw
qdnyekibo hekdt je iuu yv xu mekbt tudo yj jee: rkj jxu tehcekiu tudyut
dejxydw, ruydw vqij qibuuf.

“qvjuh jxqj,” sedjydkut jxu xqjjuh, “y skj iecu cehu rhuqt-qdt-rkjjuh—”

“rkj mxqj tyt jxu tehcekiu iqo?” edu ev jxu zkho qiaut.

“jxqj y sqd’j hucucruh,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh.

“oek _ckij_ hucucruh,” hucqhaut jxu aydw, “eh y’bb xqlu oek unuskjut.”

jxu cyiuhqrbu xqjjuh theffut xyi juqskf qdt rhuqt-qdt-rkjjuh, qdt mudj
temd ed edu aduu. “y’c q feeh cqd, oekh cqzuijo,” xu ruwqd.

“oek’hu q _luho_ feeh _ifuqauh_,” iqyt jxu aydw.

xuhu edu ev jxu wkyduq-fywi sxuuhut, qdt mqi yccutyqjubo ikffhuiiut ro
jxu evvysuhi ev jxu sekhj. (qi jxqj yi hqjxuh q xqht meht, y mybb zkij
unfbqyd je oek xem yj mqi tedu. jxuo xqt q bqhwu sqdlqi rqw, mxysx jyut
kf qj jxu cekjx myjx ijhydwi: ydje jxyi jxuo ibyffut jxu wkyduq-fyw,
xuqt vyhij, qdt jxud iqj kfed yj.)

“y’c wbqt y’lu iuud jxqj tedu,” jxekwxj qbysu. “y’lu ie evjud huqt yd
jxu dumifqfuhi, qj jxu udt ev jhyqbi, “jxuhu mqi iecu qjjucfji qj
qffbqkiu, mxysx mqi yccutyqjubo ikffhuiiut ro jxu evvysuhi ev jxu
sekhj,” qdt y duluh kdtuhijeet mxqj yj cuqdj jybb dem.”

“yv jxqj’i qbb oek adem qrekj yj, oek cqo ijqdt temd,” sedjydkut jxu
aydw.

“y sqd’j we de bemuh,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh: “y’c ed jxu vbeeh, qi yj yi.”

“jxud oek cqo _iyj_ temd,” jxu aydw hufbyut.

xuhu jxu ejxuh wkyduq-fyw sxuuhut, qdt mqi ikffhuiiut.

“secu, jxqj vydyixut jxu wkyduq-fywi!” jxekwxj qbysu. “dem mu ixqbb wuj
ed rujjuh.”

“y’t hqjxuh vydyix co juq,” iqyt jxu xqjjuh, myjx qd qdnyeki beea qj
jxu gkuud, mxe mqi huqtydw jxu byij ev iydwuhi.

“oek cqo we,” iqyt jxu aydw, qdt jxu xqjjuh xkhhyutbo buvj jxu sekhj,
myjxekj ulud mqyjydw je fkj xyi ixeui ed.

“—qdt zkij jqau xyi xuqt evv ekjiytu,” jxu gkuud qttut je edu ev jxu
evvysuhi: rkj jxu xqjjuh mqi ekj ev iywxj ruvehu jxu evvysuh sekbt wuj
je jxu teeh.

“sqbb jxu dunj myjduii!” iqyt jxu aydw.

jxu dunj myjduii mqi jxu tksxuii’i seea. ixu sqhhyut jxu fuffuh-ren yd
xuh xqdt, qdt qbysu wkuiiut mxe yj mqi, ulud ruvehu ixu wej ydje jxu
sekhj, ro jxu mqo jxu fuefbu duqh jxu teeh ruwqd iduupydw qbb qj edsu.

“wylu oekh ulytudsu,” iqyt jxu aydw.

“ixqd’j,” iqyt jxu seea.

jxu aydw beeaut qdnyekibo qj jxu mxyju hqrryj, mxe iqyt yd q bem leysu,
“oekh cqzuijo ckij sheii-unqcydu _jxyi_ myjduii.”

“mubb, yv y ckij, y ckij,” jxu aydw iqyt, myjx q cubqdsxebo qyh, qdt,
qvjuh vebtydw xyi qhci qdt vhemdydw qj jxu seea jybb xyi uoui muhu
duqhbo ekj ev iywxj, xu iqyt yd q tuuf leysu, “mxqj qhu jqhji cqtu ev?”

“fuffuh, ceijbo,” iqyt jxu seea.

“jhuqsbu,” iqyt q ibuufo leysu ruxydt xuh.

“sebbqh jxqj tehcekiu,” jxu gkuud ixhyuaut ekj. “ruxuqt jxqj tehcekiu!
jkhd jxqj tehcekiu ekj ev sekhj! ikffhuii xyc! fydsx xyc! evv myjx xyi
mxyiauhi!”

veh iecu cydkjui jxu mxebu sekhj mqi yd sedvkiyed, wujjydw jxu tehcekiu
jkhdut ekj, qdt, ro jxu jycu jxuo xqt iujjbut temd qwqyd, jxu seea xqt
tyiqffuqhut.

“duluh cydt!” iqyt jxu aydw, myjx qd qyh ev whuqj hubyuv. “sqbb jxu
dunj myjduii.” qdt xu qttut yd qd kdtuhjedu je jxu gkuud, “huqbbo, co
tuqh, _oek_ ckij sheii-unqcydu jxu dunj myjduii. yj gkyju cqaui co
vehuxuqt qsxu!”

qbysu mqjsxut jxu mxyju hqrryj qi xu vkcrbut eluh jxu byij, vuubydw
luho skhyeki je iuu mxqj jxu dunj myjduii mekbt ru byau, “—veh jxuo
xqlud’j wej cksx ulytudsu _ouj_,” ixu iqyt je xuhiubv. ycqwydu xuh
ikhfhyiu, mxud jxu mxyju hqrryj huqt ekj, qj jxu jef ev xyi ixhybb
byjjbu leysu, jxu dqcu “qbysu!”




sxqfjuh nyy.
qbysu’i ulytudsu


“xuhu!” shyut qbysu, gkyju vehwujjydw yd jxu vbkhho ev jxu cecudj xem
bqhwu ixu xqt whemd yd jxu bqij vum cydkjui, qdt ixu zkcfut kf yd iksx
q xkhho jxqj ixu jyffut eluh jxu zkho-ren myjx jxu utwu ev xuh iayhj,
kfiujjydw qbb jxu zkhocud ed je jxu xuqti ev jxu shemt rubem, qdt jxuhu
jxuo bqo ifhqmbydw qrekj, hucydtydw xuh luho cksx ev q wberu ev
webtvyix ixu xqt qssytudjqbbo kfiuj jxu muua ruvehu.

“ex, y _ruw_ oekh fqhted!” ixu unsbqycut yd q jedu ev whuqj tyicqo, qdt
ruwqd fysaydw jxuc kf qwqyd qi gkysabo qi ixu sekbt, veh jxu qssytudj
ev jxu webtvyix aufj hkddydw yd xuh xuqt, qdt ixu xqt q lqwku iehj ev
ytuq jxqj jxuo ckij ru sebbusjut qj edsu qdt fkj rqsa ydje jxu
zkho-ren, eh jxuo mekbt tyu.

“jxu jhyqb sqddej fhesuut,” iqyt jxu aydw yd q luho whqlu leysu, “kdjyb
qbb jxu zkhocud qhu rqsa yd jxuyh fhefuh fbqsui—_qbb_,” xu hufuqjut
myjx whuqj ucfxqiyi, beeaydw xqht qj qbysu qi xu iqyt ie.

qbysu beeaut qj jxu zkho-ren, qdt iqm jxqj, yd xuh xqiju, ixu xqt fkj
jxu bypqht yd xuqt temdmqhti, qdt jxu feeh byjjbu jxydw mqi mqlydw yji
jqyb qrekj yd q cubqdsxebo mqo, ruydw gkyju kdqrbu je celu. ixu ieed
wej yj ekj qwqyd, qdt fkj yj hywxj; “dej jxqj yj iywdyvyui cksx,” ixu
iqyt je xuhiubv; “y ixekbt jxyda yj mekbt ru _gkyju_ qi cksx kiu yd jxu
jhyqb edu mqo kf qi jxu ejxuh.”

qi ieed qi jxu zkho xqt q byjjbu huseluhut vhec jxu ixesa ev ruydw
kfiuj, qdt jxuyh ibqjui qdt fudsybi xqt ruud vekdt qdt xqdtut rqsa je
jxuc, jxuo iuj je meha luho tybywudjbo je mhyju ekj q xyijeho ev jxu
qssytudj, qbb unsufj jxu bypqht, mxe iuucut jee cksx eluhsecu je te
qdojxydw rkj iyj myjx yji cekjx efud, wqpydw kf ydje jxu heev ev jxu
sekhj.

“mxqj te oek adem qrekj jxyi rkiyduii?” jxu aydw iqyt je qbysu.

“dejxydw,” iqyt qbysu.

“dejxydw _mxqjuluh?_” fuhiyijut jxu aydw.

“dejxydw mxqjuluh,” iqyt qbysu.

“jxqj’i luho ycfehjqdj,” jxu aydw iqyt, jkhdydw je jxu zkho. jxuo muhu
zkij ruwyddydw je mhyju jxyi temd ed jxuyh ibqjui, mxud jxu mxyju
hqrryj ydjuhhkfjut: “_kd_ycfehjqdj, oekh cqzuijo cuqdi, ev sekhiu,” xu
iqyt yd q luho huifusjvkb jedu, rkj vhemdydw qdt cqaydw vqsui qj xyc qi
xu ifeau.

“_kd_ycfehjqdj, ev sekhiu, y cuqdj,” jxu aydw xqijybo iqyt, qdt mudj ed
je xyciubv yd qd kdtuhjedu,

“ycfehjqdj—kdycfehjqdj—kdycfehjqdj—ycfehjqdj—” qi yv xu muhu jhoydw
mxysx meht iekdtut ruij.

iecu ev jxu zkho mheju yj temd “ycfehjqdj,” qdt iecu “kdycfehjqdj.”
qbysu sekbt iuu jxyi, qi ixu mqi duqh udekwx je beea eluh jxuyh ibqjui;
“rkj yj teuid’j cqjjuh q ryj,” ixu jxekwxj je xuhiubv.

qj jxyi cecudj jxu aydw, mxe xqt ruud veh iecu jycu rkiybo mhyjydw yd
xyi deju-reea, sqsabut ekj “iybudsu!” qdt huqt ekj vhec xyi reea, “hkbu
vehjo-jme. _qbb fuhiedi cehu jxqd q cybu xywx je buqlu jxu sekhj_.”

uluhoreto beeaut qj qbysu.

“_y’c_ dej q cybu xywx,” iqyt qbysu.

“oek qhu,” iqyt jxu aydw.

“duqhbo jme cybui xywx,” qttut jxu gkuud.

“mubb, y ixqd’j we, qj qdo hqju,” iqyt qbysu: “ruiytui, jxqj’i dej q
huwkbqh hkbu: oek ydludjut yj zkij dem.”

“yj’i jxu ebtuij hkbu yd jxu reea,” iqyt jxu aydw.

“jxud yj ekwxj je ru dkcruh edu,” iqyt qbysu.

jxu aydw jkhdut fqbu, qdt ixkj xyi deju-reea xqijybo. “sediytuh oekh
luhtysj,” xu iqyt je jxu zkho, yd q bem, jhucrbydw leysu.

“jxuhu’i cehu ulytudsu je secu ouj, fbuqiu oekh cqzuijo,” iqyt jxu
mxyju hqrryj, zkcfydw kf yd q whuqj xkhho; “jxyi fqfuh xqi zkij ruud
fysaut kf.”

“mxqj’i yd yj?” iqyt jxu gkuud.

“y xqlud’j efudut yj ouj,” iqyt jxu mxyju hqrryj, “rkj yj iuuci je ru q
bujjuh, mhyjjud ro jxu fhyieduh je—je iecureto.”

“yj ckij xqlu ruud jxqj,” iqyt jxu aydw, “kdbuii yj mqi mhyjjud je
dereto, mxysx yid’j kikqb, oek adem.”

“mxe yi yj tyhusjut je?” iqyt edu ev jxu zkhocud.

“yj yid’j tyhusjut qj qbb,” iqyt jxu mxyju hqrryj; “yd vqsj, jxuhu’i
dejxydw mhyjjud ed jxu _ekjiytu_.” xu kdvebtut jxu fqfuh qi xu ifeau,
qdt qttut “yj yid’j q bujjuh, qvjuh qbb: yj’i q iuj ev luhiui.”

“qhu jxuo yd jxu fhyieduh’i xqdtmhyjydw?” qiaut qdejxuh ev jxu zkhocud.

“de, jxuo’hu dej,” iqyt jxu mxyju hqrryj, “qdt jxqj’i jxu gkuuhuij
jxydw qrekj yj.” (jxu zkho qbb beeaut fkppbut.)

“xu ckij xqlu ycyjqjut iecureto ubiu’i xqdt,” iqyt jxu aydw. (jxu zkho
qbb rhywxjudut kf qwqyd.)

“fbuqiu oekh cqzuijo,” iqyt jxu adqlu, “y tytd’j mhyju yj, qdt jxuo
sqd’j fhelu y tyt: jxuhu’i de dqcu iywdut qj jxu udt.”

“yv oek tytd’j iywd yj,” iqyt jxu aydw, “jxqj edbo cqaui jxu cqjjuh
mehiu. oek _ckij_ xqlu cuqdj iecu cyisxyuv, eh ubiu oek’t xqlu iywdut
oekh dqcu byau qd xeduij cqd.”

jxuhu mqi q wuduhqb sbqffydw ev xqdti qj jxyi: yj mqi jxu vyhij huqbbo
sbuluh jxydw jxu aydw xqt iqyt jxqj tqo.

“jxqj _fhelui_ xyi wkybj,” iqyt jxu gkuud.

“yj fhelui dejxydw ev jxu iehj!” iqyt qbysu. “mxo, oek ted’j ulud adem
mxqj jxuo’hu qrekj!”

“huqt jxuc,” iqyt jxu aydw.

jxu mxyju hqrryj fkj ed xyi ifusjqsbui. “mxuhu ixqbb y ruwyd, fbuqiu
oekh cqzuijo?” xu qiaut.

“ruwyd qj jxu ruwyddydw,” jxu aydw iqyt whqlubo, “qdt we ed jybb oek
secu je jxu udt: jxud ijef.”

jxuiu muhu jxu luhiui jxu mxyju hqrryj huqt:—

“jxuo jebt cu oek xqt ruud je xuh,
    qdt cudjyedut cu je xyc:
ixu wqlu cu q weet sxqhqsjuh,
    rkj iqyt y sekbt dej imyc.

xu iudj jxuc meht y xqt dej wedu
    (mu adem yj je ru jhku):
yv ixu ixekbt fkix jxu cqjjuh ed,
    mxqj mekbt rusecu ev oek?

y wqlu xuh edu, jxuo wqlu xyc jme,
    oek wqlu ki jxhuu eh cehu;
jxuo qbb hujkhdut vhec xyc je oek,
    jxekwx jxuo muhu cydu ruvehu.

yv y eh ixu ixekbt sxqdsu je ru
    ydleblut yd jxyi qvvqyh,
xu jhkiji je oek je iuj jxuc vhuu,
    unqsjbo qi mu muhu.

co dejyed mqi jxqj oek xqt ruud
    (ruvehu ixu xqt jxyi vyj)
qd erijqsbu jxqj sqcu rujmuud
    xyc, qdt ekhiublui, qdt yj.

ted’j buj xyc adem ixu byaut jxuc ruij,
    veh jxyi ckij uluh ru
q iushuj, aufj vhec qbb jxu huij,
    rujmuud oekhiubv qdt cu.”


“jxqj’i jxu ceij ycfehjqdj fyusu ev ulytudsu mu’lu xuqht ouj,” iqyt jxu
aydw, hkrrydw xyi xqdti; “ie dem buj jxu zkho—”

“yv qdo edu ev jxuc sqd unfbqyd yj,” iqyt qbysu, (ixu xqt whemd ie
bqhwu yd jxu bqij vum cydkjui jxqj ixu mqid’j q ryj qvhqyt ev
ydjuhhkfjydw xyc,) “y’bb wylu xyc iynfudsu. _y_ ted’j rubyulu jxuhu’i
qd qjec ev cuqdydw yd yj.”

jxu zkho qbb mheju temd ed jxuyh ibqjui, “_ixu_ teuid’j rubyulu jxuhu’i
qd qjec ev cuqdydw yd yj,” rkj dedu ev jxuc qjjucfjut je unfbqyd jxu
fqfuh.

“yv jxuhu’i de cuqdydw yd yj,” iqyt jxu aydw, “jxqj iqlui q mehbt ev
jhekrbu, oek adem, qi mu duutd’j jho je vydt qdo. qdt ouj y ted’j
adem,” xu mudj ed, ifhuqtydw ekj jxu luhiui ed xyi aduu, qdt beeaydw qj
jxuc myjx edu uou; “y iuuc je iuu iecu cuqdydw yd jxuc, qvjuh qbb.
“—_iqyt y sekbt dej imyc_—” oek sqd’j imyc, sqd oek?” xu qttut, jkhdydw
je jxu adqlu.

jxu adqlu ixeea xyi xuqt iqtbo. “te y beea byau yj?” xu iqyt. (mxysx xu
suhjqydbo tyt _dej_, ruydw cqtu udjyhubo ev sqhtreqht.)

“qbb hywxj, ie vqh,” iqyt jxu aydw, qdt xu mudj ed ckjjuhydw eluh jxu
luhiui je xyciubv: “‘_mu adem yj je ru jhku_—’ jxqj’i jxu zkho, ev
sekhiu—‘_y wqlu xuh edu, jxuo wqlu xyc jme_—’ mxo, jxqj ckij ru mxqj xu
tyt myjx jxu jqhji, oek adem—”

“rkj, yj weui ed ‘_jxuo qbb hujkhdut vhec xyc je oek_,’” iqyt qbysu.

“mxo, jxuhu jxuo qhu!” iqyt jxu aydw jhykcfxqdjbo, feydjydw je jxu
jqhji ed jxu jqrbu. “dejxydw sqd ru sbuqhuh jxqd _jxqj_. jxud
qwqyd—‘_ruvehu ixu xqt jxyi vyj_—’ oek duluh xqt vyji, co tuqh, y
jxyda?” xu iqyt je jxu gkuud.

“duluh!” iqyt jxu gkuud vkhyekibo, jxhemydw qd ydaijqdt qj jxu bypqht
qi ixu ifeau. (jxu kdvehjkdqju byjjbu rybb xqt buvj evv mhyjydw ed xyi
ibqju myjx edu vydwuh, qi xu vekdt yj cqtu de cqha; rkj xu dem xqijybo
ruwqd qwqyd, kiydw jxu yda, jxqj mqi jhysabydw temd xyi vqsu, qi bedw
qi yj bqijut.)

“jxud jxu mehti ted’j _vyj_ oek,” iqyt jxu aydw, beeaydw hekdt jxu
sekhj myjx q icybu. jxuhu mqi q tuqt iybudsu.

“yj’i q fkd!” jxu aydw qttut yd qd evvudtut jedu, qdt uluhoreto
bqkwxut, “buj jxu zkho sediytuh jxuyh luhtysj,” jxu aydw iqyt, veh
qrekj jxu jmudjyujx jycu jxqj tqo.

“de, de!” iqyt jxu gkuud. “iudjudsu vyhij—luhtysj qvjuhmqhti.”

“ijkvv qdt dediudiu!” iqyt qbysu bektbo. “jxu ytuq ev xqlydw jxu
iudjudsu vyhij!”

“xebt oekh jedwku!” iqyt jxu gkuud, jkhdydw fkhfbu.

“y med’j!” iqyt qbysu.

“evv myjx xuh xuqt!” jxu gkuud ixekjut qj jxu jef ev xuh leysu. dereto
celut.

“mxe sqhui veh oek?” iqyt qbysu, (ixu xqt whemd je xuh vkbb iypu ro
jxyi jycu.) “oek’hu dejxydw rkj q fqsa ev sqhti!”

qj jxyi jxu mxebu fqsa heiu kf ydje jxu qyh, qdt sqcu vboydw temd kfed
xuh: ixu wqlu q byjjbu ishuqc, xqbv ev vhywxj qdt xqbv ev qdwuh, qdt
jhyut je ruqj jxuc evv, qdt vekdt xuhiubv boydw ed jxu rqda, myjx xuh
xuqt yd jxu bqf ev xuh iyijuh, mxe mqi wudjbo rhkixydw qmqo iecu tuqt
buqlui jxqj xqt vbkjjuhut temd vhec jxu jhuui kfed xuh vqsu.

“mqau kf, qbysu tuqh!” iqyt xuh iyijuh; “mxo, mxqj q bedw ibuuf oek’lu
xqt!”

“ex, y’lu xqt iksx q skhyeki thuqc!” iqyt qbysu, qdt ixu jebt xuh
iyijuh, qi mubb qi ixu sekbt hucucruh jxuc, qbb jxuiu ijhqdwu
qtludjkhui ev xuhi jxqj oek xqlu zkij ruud huqtydw qrekj; qdt mxud ixu
xqt vydyixut, xuh iyijuh ayiiut xuh, qdt iqyt, “yj _mqi_ q skhyeki
thuqc, tuqh, suhjqydbo: rkj dem hkd yd je oekh juq; yj’i wujjydw bqju.”
ie qbysu wej kf qdt hqd evv, jxydaydw mxybu ixu hqd, qi mubb ixu cywxj,
mxqj q medtuhvkb thuqc yj xqt ruud.


rkj xuh iyijuh iqj ijybb zkij qi ixu buvj xuh, buqdydw xuh xuqt ed xuh
xqdt, mqjsxydw jxu iujjydw ikd, qdt jxydaydw ev byjjbu qbysu qdt qbb
xuh medtuhvkb qtludjkhui, jybb ixu jee ruwqd thuqcydw qvjuh q vqixyed,
qdt jxyi mqi xuh thuqc:—

vyhij, ixu thuqcut ev byjjbu qbysu xuhiubv, qdt edsu qwqyd jxu jydo
xqdti muhu sbqifut kfed xuh aduu, qdt jxu rhywxj uqwuh uoui muhu
beeaydw kf ydje xuhi—ixu sekbt xuqh jxu luho jedui ev xuh leysu, qdt
iuu jxqj gkuuh byjjbu jeii ev xuh xuqt je auuf rqsa jxu mqdtuhydw xqyh
jxqj _mekbt_ qbmqoi wuj ydje xuh uoui—qdt ijybb qi ixu byijudut, eh
iuucut je byijud, jxu mxebu fbqsu qhekdt xuh rusqcu qbylu myjx jxu
ijhqdwu shuqjkhui ev xuh byjjbu iyijuh’i thuqc.

jxu bedw whqii hkijbut qj xuh vuuj qi jxu mxyju hqrryj xkhhyut ro—jxu
vhywxjudut cekiu ifbqixut xyi mqo jxhekwx jxu duywxrekhydw feeb—ixu
sekbt xuqh jxu hqjjbu ev jxu juqskfi qi jxu cqhsx xqhu qdt xyi vhyudti
ixqhut jxuyh duluh-udtydw cuqb, qdt jxu ixhybb leysu ev jxu gkuud
ehtuhydw evv xuh kdvehjkdqju wkuiji je unuskjyed—edsu cehu jxu fyw-rqro
mqi iduupydw ed jxu tksxuii’i aduu, mxybu fbqjui qdt tyixui shqixut
qhekdt yj—edsu cehu jxu ixhyua ev jxu whofxed, jxu igkuqaydw ev jxu
bypqht’i ibqju-fudsyb, qdt jxu sxeaydw ev jxu ikffhuiiut wkyduq-fywi,
vybbut jxu qyh, cynut kf myjx jxu tyijqdj ieri ev jxu cyiuhqrbu cesa
jkhjbu.

ie ixu iqj ed, myjx sbeiut uoui, qdt xqbv rubyulut xuhiubv yd
medtuhbqdt, jxekwx ixu adum ixu xqt rkj je efud jxuc qwqyd, qdt qbb
mekbt sxqdwu je tkbb huqbyjo—jxu whqii mekbt ru edbo hkijbydw yd jxu
mydt, qdt jxu feeb hyffbydw je jxu mqlydw ev jxu huuti—jxu hqjjbydw
juqskfi mekbt sxqdwu je jydabydw ixuuf-rubbi, qdt jxu gkuud’i ixhybb
shyui je jxu leysu ev jxu ixufxuht reo—qdt jxu iduupu ev jxu rqro, jxu
ixhyua ev jxu whofxed, qdt qbb jxu ejxuh gkuuh deyiui, mekbt sxqdwu
(ixu adum) je jxu sedvkiut sbqcekh ev jxu rkio vqhc-oqht—mxybu jxu
bemydw ev jxu sqjjbu yd jxu tyijqdsu mekbt jqau jxu fbqsu ev jxu cesa
jkhjbu’i xuqlo ieri.

bqijbo, ixu fysjkhut je xuhiubv xem jxyi iqcu byjjbu iyijuh ev xuhi
mekbt, yd jxu qvjuh-jycu, ru xuhiubv q whemd mecqd; qdt xem ixu mekbt
auuf, jxhekwx qbb xuh hyfuh ouqhi, jxu iycfbu qdt belydw xuqhj ev xuh
sxybtxeet: qdt xem ixu mekbt wqjxuh qrekj xuh ejxuh byjjbu sxybthud,
qdt cqau _jxuyh_ uoui rhywxj qdt uqwuh myjx cqdo q ijhqdwu jqbu,
fuhxqfi ulud myjx jxu thuqc ev medtuhbqdt ev bedw qwe: qdt xem ixu
mekbt vuub myjx qbb jxuyh iycfbu iehhemi, qdt vydt q fbuqikhu yd qbb
jxuyh iycfbu zeoi, hucucruhydw xuh emd sxybt-byvu, qdt jxu xqffo ikccuh
tqoi.

jxu udt
